Please
e this
with care.

It

The University of Connecticut
Libraries, Storrs

'"^'i

c

z
HV 503S.B6

hbl, brti
Temperance

3 T153

DDSflElbS

movement:

^
O

Ti

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2011 with funding from
LYRASIS members and Sloan Foundation

http://www.archive.org/details/temperancemovemeOOblai

T

BY

'/ /^^

Vj

\p
y'i

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT:
OR,

THE

CONFLICT
AND

BETWEEN

MAN

ALCOHOL.

BY

HENRY
UNITED

STATES

WILLIAM
SENATOR

ELAIR,

FROM

NEW

HAMPSHIRE.

BOSTON:
THE WILLIAM

E. SMYTHE

COlMPAiTY.

CHICAGO :
E. G. BADOUX

AXD

1888.

COMPA]SrT.

Copyright, 1887, by H. W. Blair.

^0 thz '^ztnovv;

MY

FATHER

AND

MOTHER.

Henry

William

Bi^Aia

PREFACE.

The conflict between man and alcohol is as old as civilization, more destructive than any other form of warfare, and
as fierce to-day as at any time since the beginning.
It is not an exaggeration to say that no other evil known
in human history has been of such vast proportions and
lamentable consequences as that of alcoholic intemperance.
As the whole past of the race has been cursed by it, so its
whole future is threatened with increasing calamity, unless
there be a period put to its ravages.
It is a peculiarity of this curse that it is developed by
civilization, and then, like the parricide, it destroys the
source of its own life.
But although alcohol is his special foe, it by no means
confines its dagger and chalice to civilized man.
Combining with the spirit of a mercenary commerce, this
active essence of evil is hunting and extirpating the weaker
races and indigenous populations of uncivilized countries
from the face of the earth.
The object of this book is, if possible, to arrest the attention of the American, if of no other people ; to place before
them the leading facts which enter into the great debate now
pending on our own and the European continents, and to
assist man, however feebly, in this great struggle with
alcohol for his life.
The plan attempted has been to place clearly before the
mind the nature of alcohol as a poison to the healthy human
system ; its destructive efiects upon the body and soul of its
victim ; to portray its tremendous proportions and malignant
influence upon society, nations and races of men ; to discuss
the remedies of this great evil by the exercise of moral suasion and educative forces, both spiritual and physical, and

X

PREFACE.

by the action of society in the enactment and enforcement of
law. This is followed by some account of the organizations
and agencies, religious, secular and political, which are and
must be engaged in the effort to remove the gigantic evil
and crime of alcoholic intemperance from the world.
The plan has failed in execution unless it be found that
this book contains a systematic and comprehensive discussion
of the evil and of its appropriate remedy ; but it cannot be
hoped that so vast and important a subject is treated in a
single volume with that completeness which will be desired
by many.
If I shall have been able to induce others with greater
powers and opportunities to perform the work more satisfactorily, shall
I
rejoice in even that degree of success.
The views of the author upon this great problem are not
of recent formation, and their former expression is repeated
in parts of some of the chapters which treat of remedial
measures ; but it is believed that the public will not regret
the restatement of facts and arguments which have never
been refuted, which are vital to the subject, and new to the
great mass of the people.
The truth is that the alcoholic evil is now the su1)ject of
a crucial investigation, such as the public mind has never
before given to it, and I believe that as a result, although
the end may be long delayed, the miserable and pernicious
traffic will perish forever, execrated by man and consumed
in the fiercest flames of God's wrath.
THE

United States Senate,
December, 1887.

AUTHOR.

CONTENTS.
CHAPTER
A

BRIEF

STUDY

I.

OF

ALCOHOL.
Page

Alcohol as a Superstition — Its Place among the Gods and the
Devils of Imagination — The Doubtful Origin of Wine and
Ancient Traditions Concerning It — Discovery of Distillation
in the Twelfth Century — How Webster and Worcester Define
Alcohol — Dr. Richardson's Statement of its Chemical Properties— The Nature of Alcohol and its Relation to the Elements of our own Organism — The Foods that Nourish the
Body and the Food Properties of Alcohol Compared — The
Process of Fermentation — The Process of Distillation —
Name and Strength of Various Alcoholic Preparations —
Alcohol the Product of IMan's Ingenuity and not of Nature

CHAPTER
EFFECT

OF

ALCOHOL

UPON

n.

THE

HUMAN

BODY

AND

SOUL.

Liquor as an Article of Commerce — Alcohol in the Body — Importance ofMedical Testimony — The Development of Drunkenness during the Past Three Centuries — The Experiments
of Lallemand, Perrin and Duroy — A Terrier Dog under the
Influence of Liquor — The Latest Demonstrations of Dr.
Richardson — How Alcohol Travels with the Blood, and what
it does on its Travels — Experiments of Parkes and Wallowicz
on a Healthy Man — How his Heart was Affected by Alcohol
— Effect of the Social Glass at a Dinner Party

CHAPTER
ALCOHOL

NOT

in.
A

FOOD.

Can it be a Very Bad and a Very Good Thing at the Same Time ? —
Plow Ale and Beer Fatten — Dr. Richardson's Examination of
the Qualities of Alcohol as a Food — No Claim to Efficacy
in Structure Building — The Search of the Physicians for a.
xi

14

XI 1

CONTENTS.

Virtue in Alcohol — Four Stages of Change Produced on the
Body by Liquor — How Alcohol gets out of the Body — If it
is not a Food, there is No Occasion for its Consumption as a
Drink

CHAPTER
ALCOHOL

32

IV.

AGAINST THE BODY.

Dr. Richardson's Investigations Continued — Experiments with a
Frog — Alcohol as a Regular Stimulant a Delusion — How
Light Drinkers are Affected — Effect on the Heart and Other
Organs — How Disease is Originated — When the Memory
becomes a Victim of the Habit — Gradual Steps of Physical
Regeneration through Use of Liquor

CHAPTER
SCIENTIFIC

42

V.

INVESTIGATIONS.

When Liebig's Theory was Supreme — Alcohol in the Brain of a
Dead Debauchee — The Alcoholic Alphabet — How the Liquor
gets out of the Body — Is it Poison, Food, or Medicine ? —
How the Dictionaries define the Terms — Dr. Hammond's Experiments with a Dog — His List of Diseases Created by the
use of Alcohol — His Letter to the Author — Literal Meaning
of the Word " Intoxication " — The use of Poisons for ]\Iedi- »
cal Purposes — The use of Beer — Its Stupefying Effects on
its Devotees — The Cruel Results which have followed the
wide use of Beer — How Old Appetites have been Awakened
and New Ones Created
56

CHAPTER
ALCOHOL

AS

THE

CREATOR

VI.
OF

DISEASE.

Alcohol as the Creator of Disease — How it attacks the Integrity
of the Body through the Blood ^— Dr. Dickinson's Account of
the Diseases it Fosters — The Ally of Cholera — Recollections
of the Cholera Epidemic in New York, 1832 — Dr. Beaumont's Experiments — Striking Illustration of the Effects of
Drink — The Drunkard's Stomach, Reproduced in Colors —
The Curse of Intemperance transmitted to Postei'ity — Startling Facts from Experience — The History of Four Generations of a Family of Drunkards — The Causes of Insanity —
Intemperance Leading them All

85

CONTENTS.

CHAPTEE
ALCOHOL

AND

VII.

LENGTH

OF

LIFE.

Investigations of the Subject by Life Insurance and Provident
Associations — Human Life as a Business Commodity — Experience of some Great English Institutions — Superior Showing made by their Temperance Sections — Cases where the
Premiimis are Reduced Ten Per Cent, for Total Abstainers —
Striking Comparisons shown by Diagrams — Experience of
the Sons of Temperance — Mortality among Beer Sellers —
Testimony of Leading Insurance Experts — Letter from Chief
Medical Examiner Lambert of the Equitable

CHAPTER
ALCOHOL

IN

98

VIII.
MEDICINE.

Considerations which Influence the Body of Physicians to Prescribe it— Difficulties they Encounter — Declarations of Noted
Medical Bodies — Evidence that the Physicians were Early
Advocates of Moderation — Resolutions of English Bodies —
The Views of Dr. Still6 — A Physician who thinlvs Alcohol
Sometimes Useful, Necessary and Indisi^ensable — The Opinions of Dr. Davis on the Other Side — His Dissection of the
Arguments for Alcohol — Review of Various Investigations —
Letter from Dr. Hargreaves — Dr. Palmer's Statement of the
Case — Varying Opinions and how they are Sustained — Dr.
Rembaugh's Position — Dr. Wilder's Letter — Important Conclusions

ALCOHOL

Xlll

CHAPTER

IX.

IS PAUPERISM

AND CRIME.

The Two Gi-eat Burdens of Societj^ — The Difference and the Likeness between Them — What the Pauper Returns of Massachusetts Show — Figures and Facts from Almshouse Superintendents— Sir Matthew Hale's Statement of the Causes of
Crime — Experience of New York Officials — What Governor Dix said in 1873 — Startling Facts about the Effects of
Beer Drinking by Women — A New Hampshire Opinion
Based en Practical Experience

116

160

XIV

CONTENTS.

CHAPTEE
INTEMPERANCE

AMONG

X.
MANUAL

WORKERS.

A Topic that is Closely Connected with the Labor Problem — Testimony taken by the Senate Committee — A Manchester Carpenter's Thoughtful Observations — Practical Effect of the Drinking Habit on the Skilled Trades — Wages and the Money
Spent for Drinks — Some Considerations Based on Tenth
Census Facts — Edward Atkinson's Calculations — George E.
McNeill's Contrary Views on the Subject of Economy — His
Statement of the Cost of Living — Mr. Powderly's Answer to
a Critic — A letter in Avhich he Defends his Position as an
Ultra Temperance Man — His Presentation of the Cost of the
Drinking Habit to Workingmen — Testimony of Fall River
Mill Hands — Some Final Considerations upon the Relation of
Temperance to the Wage and Labor Problems

CHAPTER
ALCOHOL

DESTROYS

THE

XL

WEALTH

OF

THE

PEOPLE.

Some Things that are Clear in Regard to the Effects of Alcohol —
An Invoice of the Stock in Trade of an Lidustry of Destruction — The Claim that Temperance Statistics are Inflated and
Unreliable — The Demand for a Commission of Inquiry —
Col. Switzler's Work — The Liquor Production of the United
States — A Table Representing a Gigantic Business Transaction— Remarkable Licrease in the Use of Malt Liquors —
Facts Furnished by the Brewers' Association — Letter of Louis
Schode — Mr. Zimmerman's Figures — The 100,000 Annual
Victims — The Figures for 1886 — The Cost of Drink per
Family — The Annual Loss to the Nation — Demand for a
Commission of Inquiry

CHAPTEE
ALCOHOL

DESTROYS

THE

169

194

Xn.

WEALTH

OF

THE

WORLD.

The Fate of all Civilized Nations Affected by the Liquor Traffic —
Consumption of Spirits in the United Kingdom — The Amount
per Capita — Money enough Spent for Liquor from 1831 to
1881 to Piu'chase the Entire United Kingdom — The Case in
France — The Use of Liquor Doubled in Forty Years — Report to the French Government — The Home of the American
Despot — Telling Facts and Figures Showing the Vast Extent
of the Traffic
\ . . 238

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER
ALCOHOL

XV

Xni.

THROUGHOUT

THE

WORLD.

The Trade with Africa, Asia and the Islands of the Sea — How it
has Followed the March of Discovery — The Situation in the
Valley of the Congo — The Vice of Intemperance almost
Unknown where the Mohammedan Religion Prevails — Advent of the European Slave and Gin Trade — Testimony of
the Missionai'ies — Government Influences at Work in Southern Africa — A Heathen Gough — How a Heathen Tribe Vigorously Suppressed the Habit and the Trade
255

CHAPTER
THE

REMEDIES

—

XIV.

TOTAL

ABSTINENCE.

Alcohol the Tyrant of all Ages and Races — Are the Chains of the
Liquor Habit to be Perpetual ? Shall there be a " New Emancipation"?—The Forces of the Temperance Reform until
latel}^ a God-inspired Mob — A Great War before us — The
Emancipation of Fifteen Hundred Millions — Agencies to be
Employed by the Organized Army of Reform Considered :
Individual, Associated and Political — Personal Total Abstinence a Recent Evolution of Christian Civilization — The
Dictum of Science and Duty
284

CHAPTER
EDUCATIONAL

XV.
FORCES.

The Policy of Prevention — Education of the Child the Secret of
Success — Rescue the Drunkard; but Educate the Child —
— Home the Primary Field of Action — The Church Work of
Education — The Public Schools and Scientific Instruction —
"Temperance Education Law" — The Bill for National Aid
to Education — Its Principles Stated — Its Bearing on the
Temperance Work — Testimony of Public Men to its INIerits
and Importance

CHAPTER
"PERSONAL

liberty"

XVI.
AND

PUBLIC

LAW.

The Right to Fight the Rum Traffic by Legislation — The Objection urged against Prohibition — The Manufacture and Sale

295

XVI

CONTENTS.

of Liquors in the Light of "an Inalienable Right" — " Sumptuary Laws " Improperly Defined by Hon. Geo. G. Vest as
"Prohibitory Legislation" — The Right to Oppose the Rum
TraflSc Argued — No "Personal Liberty" to Make or Sell
Agencies to Produce Crime and Murder — The Liquor Traffic
Considered as a " Business" — Fundamental Propositions as to
Legislation on the Liquor Traffic

CHAPTER
WHICH

LAW,

LICENSE

XVII.
OR

PROHIBITION?

The Principles Underlying the License Idea Discussed — Prohibition under a Chinese Emperor, Four Thousand Years Ago —
New York City under License Mapjjed and Studied as a City
of Saloons — The Relative Merits of License and Prohibition
as Means of Restriction — " Prohibition Does not Prohibit" an
Absurdity — Gov. Dingley's Testimony — New Hampshire and
Vermont

CHAPTER
NATIONAL

337

352

XVIII.

PROHIBITION.

No Other Form of Real Prohibition Possible — Control the Traffic
from Origin to End — Necessity of Exerting the National
Power — National Prohibition the Plan of Battle — Prohibition Amendment to National Constitution Presented in 1876
— Its Provisions Noted — The Subject Discussed from the
National Stand-point — Manufacture as well as Sale must be
Prohibited — The Temperance Reform most needs Nationalization — Concentrate on National Prohibitoiy Amendment to
Constitution — Right and Necessity of National Legislation
Discussed — The Amendment Reviewed — State Prohibition
and National Prohibition Together — National Prohibitory
Amendment should be the Preliminary Bunker Hill, not the
Crowning Yorktown

CHAPTER
WOMAN

SUFFRAGE

AND

XIX.

TEMPERANCE

REFORM.

Woman's Kingdom, the Home, at Stake — Woman the Greatest
Barrier to Intemperance — Temperance is Woman's War —
Rum Destroys the Home — Suffrage of Woman Indispensable
to the Temperance Reform — Human Suffrage the True Ideal

372

CONTENTS.

— Woman Suffrage Discussed — Senate Committee's Report
on Suffrage of Woman — Woman's Christian Temperance
Union, an Illustration of Woman's Ability to Shape Action —
Ouida's Notions about Women — Intelligent Men Concede
Woman's Capacity and Moral Fitness — Suffrage not a Right
Dependent on Sex — To Vote the Great Primitive Right —
Maternity does not Disqualify; Motherhood adds Motives —
Mothers can Attend Chui'ch, why not the Polls? — Objection
that Woman does not Desire Suffrage — Objection that Husband and Wife vrill Disagree — Experience of Wyoming,
Washington, and Kansas — Women Voting has made Voting
Respectable — Senate Report on Development of AVoman
Suffrage — School Suffrage in Eleven States — Speech of Hon.
AlbertGriffin — Free Suffrao-e for All

CHAPTER
HISTORICAL

SKETCH

OF

THE

FORCES

AGAINST

ALCOHOL

397

XX.
TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

The Temperance Movement an Effort of Humanity to Unchain
Itself — The Sj^irit of Liberty as Conceived by the Fathers of
the Republic — Four Valuable Volumes — Dr. Benjamin Rush's
Pamjihlet the Starting Point of the Present Movement — Hon.
Samuel Dexter's Picture of the Situation in 1814 — The Evil
at Later Dates — Rev. Ljmian Beecher's Description of the
"Creature Comforts "at a Connecticut Ordination in 1810 —
Churches and Religious Associations Awake — American
Society for the Promotion of Temperance Organized 1826 —
Massachusetts Medical Societj^ Discourages the Use of Liquors,
1827 — Rush, Muzzey, Davis — Jonathan Kittredge's Pamphlet
— The Famous Massachusetts Fifteen-Gallon Law — The
Washingtonians in 1840 — The Maine Law — Neal Dow the
Columbus of Prohibition — For Thirty-Five Years Temperance has Moved on Abstinence and Prohibition

CHAPTER

XVII

XXL
RELIGIOUS

ORGANIZATIONS.

The Two Great Principles, Total Abstinence and Prohibition —
Religious Organizations — "One Hundred Years of Temperance"—The Roll-Call of the Churches — Presbyterian Church
— John Wesley and the Methodist Champions — The Baptist
Position ; Gov. George N. Briggs and Congressional Temperance Society ; Wayland, Knapp, Garrison : Mississippi Conven-

421

XVlll

CONTENTS.

tion of 1884 : Dr. GiflPord's Summary — Reformed Dutch Chui'ch
— Cumberland Presbyterian Church — Lutheran Church —
Society of Friends — United Brethren — Disciples of Christ —
Universalist Church : Thompson, Chapin and Miner — Methodist Protestant Church — Congregational Churches; Humphrey, Evarts, Beecher, Justin Edwards, Cheever, Gough,
Wilson and others — Episcoi^al Church — German Refoi-med
Church — The Moravians — Reformed Episcopal — The UnitariansLowell,
;
Channing, Ware, May, Pierreijont, Gannett,
Hale, Faxon — Free Baptist Church — Christian Church —
Church of God — United Presbyterian Church — African Methodists— Evangelical Association — Methodist Episcopal Church
South — The Unanimity of the Churches on this Great Moral
Issue

CHAPTER
THE

XXII.

CATHOLIC

CHURCH.

Important Factor, Seven Million American Adherents — American
Catholic Total Abstinence Union — Leo XHI.'s Letter to
Bishop Ireland, 1887 — Baltimore Council ; Cardinal Gibbons
— Murray's "Catechism of Intemperance" — Catholic Total
Abstinence Union Established 1872 — Father Cleary at the
Philadelphia Temperance Centennial — Powderly, Archbishop
Ryan, Bishop Ireland ; Father Mathew, Cardinal Manning,
and Father Nugent — Catholic Temperance Magazine 1887 :
"The Loss of our Children" — Catholics in Labor Organizations— Father Conaty's Two Addresses — "Total Abstinence Organized on Catholic Principles " — The Catholic
Church and her followers will eventually demand Prohibition,

CHAPTER
TEMPERANCE

439

XXIII.

ORGANIZATIONS.

The National Temperance Society and Publication House; Agitation and Literature ; ' ' Total Abstinence and Prohibition " ;
William E. Dodge and Theodore Cuyler; The Temperance,
Advocate — Independent Order of Good Templars; Five Million Members ; an Organization which Belts the Globe ; Six
Hundred Thousand Meetings a Year ; the Ritual in a Dozen
Languages ; the Lamented Hon. John B. Finch — The Sons of
Temperance; the Oldest Secret Temperance Societj', Organized 1842; Gen. Sam. Gary:
"Seal up the Fountain of

472

CONTENTS.

Death"; Growth in Southern States; Eugene H. Clapp, "Responsibility of the Individual for Inebriety " — Templars of
Honor and Temperance — Citizens' Law and Order League of
the LTnited States; the Object to Enforce Existing Laws;
Charles C. Bonney, President ; Platform of Convention, 1885
— Royal Templars of Temperance — Cadets of Temperance —
United Temperance Association — United Kingdom Alliance
— British Temperance League — Scottish Temperance League
— Irish Temperance League — Political Parties and the Reform — Through Parties or Above Parties, the People Should
Extirpate the Evil from the Land

CHAPTER
THE

woman's

XIX

486

XXIV.

christian

TEMPERANCE

UNION.

The W. C. T. U. both a Religious and Secular Organization — Exhortation, Enlightenment, Administration, Charity — It is
Woman Organized — Ten Thousand Local Unions — National
W. C. T. U. — The Woman's Crusade — Dr. Dio Lewis —
History of the Crusade, by Sarah K. Bolton — The Story of
tlie Crusade — Graphic Incidents — The Woman's Crusade
becomes the Woman's Christian Temperance Union — The
Chautauqua Meeting — Mrs. Annie Wittenmyer, President —
Cincinnati First Annual Meeting, 1875 — MinneajDolis Annual
Meeting, 1886 — Thirty or Forty Departments of their Temperance Activity — Miss Frances E. Willard Pi*esident since
1879 — Department of Organization — Preventive Department
— Educational Department; Mrs. Mary Hunt — Social Department— Legal DejDartment — The AVorld's W. C. T. U.,
John Bright's Sister President — Organizers and Superintendents — The Union Signal — Song as a Power in the Work ;
Mrs. Elizabeth Thompson, INIiss Anna Gordon — A Few
Names of Leaders
502

WHAT

CHAPTER

XXV.

SHALL

DO

WE

NEXT?

Since Waterloo no Year in which Rum has not been the Great
Destroyer — Governor St. John's Speech at Worcester -^ The
New Century of Temperance Reform — A Look Backward
on the Past — Means of the Past Successes — Helps and Hindrances — One Hundred Years have Wrought Conviction —
The Removal of the Evil is now the Problem — The Ques-

XX

CONTENTS.

tion Everywhere, North and South, East and West — The
American People must Act — What to do Next? — Washingtonian Moral Suasion not Sufficient — Constitutional Amendment — Not of what Party, but will the Member of Congress
Vote Prohibitory Amendment ? — In 1890 Submit the Amendment to the People — No more Mistakes — Unanimity and
Efficiency — Caucuses, Primaries and Nominating Conventions
— National Prohibition our Watchword — Then, America the
Temperance Leader and Redeemer of the Nations

52S

LIST

OF

MAP

ILLUSTRATIONS.

AND

DIAGEAMS.
Page

Colored Map of New York City from the Battery to Central Park,
showing the Location of all Drinking-Places
Diagram sho^v^ng the Comparative Length of Life of Employees
of the Brewing Trade with other crafts
Diagram showing the Longevity of Sons of Temperance compared
with the Members of Non- Abstaining Organizations ....
Diagram showing the Relative Cost of Drink and of the Necessities
of Life in the United States

232

Diagram showing the Expenditm-es for Drink compared with the
Amomit paid for Wages, etc

237

105
106

COLOEED PLATES.
The Cancerous Stomach

54

The Kidneys — Healthy State — Diseased fi-om Intemperance
. .
The Liver in various conditions — Healthy Section — Nutmeg Degeneration —Cheesy and Cancerous Degeneration — Cancerous Tubercles

63
72

Diagram of the Stomach in various conditions — Healthful — Mod'

erate

Drinking — Drunkard's — Ulcerous — After
bauch — Death by Delirium Tremens

EULL-PAGE
The Author
Dr. William
Hon. William

a long de-

81

POETEAITS.
Frontispiece
9

Hakgreaves
Author of " Alcohol and Science."
Windom

18

Ex-Secretary of the Treasury.
Canox Wilberforce
Hon. a. H. Colquitt

27
36

LTnited States Senator from Georgia.
Dr. Daniel Dorchester

45

Dr. N. S. Davis

Author of " The Liquor Problem."
xxi

90

XXU

LIST

Dr. I. K. Funk
,
J. N. Stearns

OF

ILLUSTRATIONS.
9»

Editor of The Voice.
108

Publishing Agent of the National Temperance Society.
Rev. George C. Haddock
The Iowa Martyr.
Roderick Dhu Gambrell
The Mississippi Martyr.
Hon. Albert Griffin

136

Chairman Anti-Saloon Republican National Committee.
Rev. Joseph Cook
Dr. T. De Witt Talmage
Hon. George W. Bain
Benjamin R. Jewell

145
154
163
172

Henry

Secretary Massachusetts Temperance Society.
H. Faxon

Miss Anna

" Of Quincy."

Gordon

118
127

181
190

Associated with Miss Willard.
A. M. Pow^ELL

199

Editor of National Temperance Advocate.
Mrs. Dr. John P. Newman

210

Washington, D.C.
Mrs. Frances

J. Barnes

Superintendent of Young Women's Work, A¥. C. T. U.
Mrs. N. H. Knox
President of the W. C. T. U. of New Hampshire.
Mrs. Mary A. Livermore
Mrs. Armenia S. White
Mrs. Hannah Whitall Smith
American Secretary of the World's W. C. T.'U.
Allen West
Editor of The Union Signal.
Mrs. Mary Clement Leavitt
Mrs, Mary

Mrs. Mary

World's Missionary of W. C. T. U.
T. Lathrop

President of the W. C. T. U. of Michigan.
Mrs. William Sibley

220
229
241
250
259
268
276
286
293

President W. C. T. U. of Georgia.
Mrs, M. H, Hunt

303

National Superintendent Scientific Instruction in Schools and Colleges.
Mrs. Judge E. T. Merrick
310
President W. C. T. U. of Louisiana.
Mrs. Sallie F. Chapin
320
National Supt. of the Southern Work of the W. C. T. U.
Mrs. Matilda B. Carse
Pi'esident Woman's Temperance Pub. Association of Chicago.
Mrs. L, M. N. Stevens
President of the W. C. T. U. of Maine.
.

328
339

LIST

OF

ILLUSTRATIONS.

XXllI

Miss Julia Coleman
National Superintendent of Literature of W. C. T. U.
John B. Finch
The Late Head of the Good Templars.
Mrs. Sakah D. La Fetka
President W. C. T. U. of District of Columbia.
Mrs. Mary T. Burt
President W. C. T. U. of New York.
Mrs. J. Ellen Foster
President of the W. C. T. U. of Iowa.
Mrs. Zeralda G. Wallace
National Suj)t. Franchise Dept. W. C. T. U.
Mrs. Angie P. Newman
Lincoln, Neb.
Eugene H. Clapp
Head of the Sons of Temperance.
Gen. Neal Dow

348
357
367
379
389
401
409
425
437

"Father of the Maine Law."
Dr. J. M. Buckley
Editor of Tlie Chrislian Advocate.
George A. Bailey
Chief of Good Templars in New Hampshire.
Mrs. M. a. Bent
The Bugler of the W. C. T. U.
His Eminence Cardinal Gibbons
Mrs. Esther T. Housh
Of Vermont.
Rev. Theodore L. Flood, D.D
Editor of Tlie Chautauquan.
Mrs. E. J. Thompson
^Mother of the Crusade.
Miss Frances E. Willard
President National W. C. T. U.
Mrs. Mary A. Woodbridge
Recording Secretary of National W. C. T. U.
Mrs. C. B. Buell
Corresponding Secretary National W. C. T. U.
Miss Esther Pugh
Treasurer National W. C. T. U.
Mrs. Clara Hoffman
President of the W. C. T. U. of IMissouri.
'

"Mother

Stewart"

Mrs. J. K. Barney

445>
455
467
477
491
499
505511
517
521
523
528
533

"Of the Crusade."
Of Rhode Island.

537

THE TEMPERANCE
CHAPTER
A

BRIEF

STUDY

MOVEMENT,
I.

OF

ALCOHOL.

Alcohol as a Superstition — Its Place among the Gods and the Devils of
Imagination — The Doubtful Origin of Wine and Ancient Traditions
Concerning It — Discovery of Distillation in the Twelfth Centuiy — How
Webster and Worcester Define Alcohol — Dr. Richardson's Statement of
its Chemical Properties — The Nature of Alcohol and its Relation to the
Elements of our own Organism — The Foods that Nourish the Body
and the Food Properties of Alcohol Compared — The Process of Fermentation— The Process of Distillation — Name and Strength of A^arious
Alcoholic Preparations — Alcohol the Product of Man's Ingenuity and
not of Nature.

THERE is no tiling of his own manufacture which has
such power over the body and soul of man as the mysterious substance to which has been oiven the name — alcohol.
Indeed, so subtile and canny are its methods of asserting its
influence, so commanding is its control over the spiritual as
well as the physical structure, and so direct do its relations appear to be with the eternal essence, as well as with the material
parts of human nature, that from time immemorial this strange
drug has maintained a personified existence in the imaginations of men.
From whatever source, and by whatever process derived,
and by whatever name the preparation containing it has been
known, ever since fermentation evolved the substance which
has been the one common principle of intoxicating beverages,
in all ages and among all the inhabitants of the earth, even to
our own times, superstition has placed it among her gods and
her devils ; poetry has celebrated its qualities with her choicest
numbers ; religion has appropriated its powers to her sacred
(1)

Z

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

rites ; war and peace, joy and sorrow, all ranks and conditions
of men, in all the events of life, including its origin and its
catastrophe, have associated with themselves the fascinations
of alcohol.
The discovery of vinous fermentation, which is supJDOsed
to be the earliest manifestation of this spirit in the economy
of human life, is lost among the impenetrable clouds that
forever settle over prehistoric times ; but it must have been
considered a wondrous event, which, no doubt, was carried
from the place of its origin to surrounding tribes and nations
as a new art and marvelous instrumentality.
We are told that when first civilization developed society
into nations, and these new organizations concentrated their
aggressive powers in the form of armies and navies to place
the yoke of power upon the neck of savage tribes, or sought
by peaceful commerce to stimulate and appropriate the productions ofnature, and of savage or barbarous men in other
regions of the earth, "the wine god, the wine cup and wine"
were everywhere unknown. The art of its manufacture spread
from some common center by the agency of commerce and war.
The Egyptians, the Greeks, the Romans, all claim that wine,
the earliest known beverage of intoxication, was the invention
of one of their own particular line of gods.
The discovery, as it spread from tribe to tribe and land to
land, impressed itself as a landmark upon universal mythology.
It must have produced an effect similar to the discovery of
artificial fire. If Prometheus brought the one from heaven,
Bacchus, who was the god of intoxication, and held full rank
with the celestial representatives of love and war, must have
brought his withering flame from the hottest regions of Tartarus.
Alcoholic drinks are the work of man. They are a part
of the history of the human race. When in the twelfth
century the discovery of distillation greatly increased their
potency, and a few centuries later the process was appropriated by all civilized nations, intoxicating beverages assumed an importance and asserted a destructive power in
the affairs of mankind, which has grown with the progress
of civilization and spread with enlightenment, as the night
follows the day, until now they fill the world, and no problem

DEFINITIONS

OF

ALCOHOL.

6

of superior consequence or difficulty confronts the Cliristian,
ttie patriot, or the lover of mankind, than how to remove them
from the face of the earth. Whatever may be the differences
among men as to the necessity, the usefulness or at least the
innocence of alcohol in the economy of life, it is conceded by
all that great evils arise from its abuse, and that its record on
the whole is one of calamity — some say with mitigation, others,
without.
It is now as active as ever, and its use is increasins: with
great rapidity. Owing to the rapid colonization of the world
by civilized and commercial nations which are its chief producers and hitherto have been its principal consumers, it can
be but a few years before every man, woman and child of the
whole fifteen hundred millions of the race, at least four-fifths
of whom are as defenseless as little children against its Circean
power, will find the bottles of Christendom at their lips.
If cursed is he who putteth the cup of intoxication to his
neighbor's lip, then it becomes necessary for those engaged in
the foul work to examine the nature of their occupation for
their own good. I propose in this ])ook to investigate the subject as fairly and thoroughly as possible in the brief time and
with the facilities at my command. I have no desire to exaggerate or intensify. The sul)ject is broad, and high, and deep.
But it is upon the American people and compels the attention
of the whole world. It cannot be evaded. Postponement
even is no longer possible, and, if it were, would but aggravate
existing evils and multiply the difficulty of their removal.
The operation must be performed.
It is important in the first place to obtain a clear idea of
the thing itself, and of its action upon the body and soul.
Webster defines Alcohol as follows :

"Pure or highly rectified spirit, extracted by simple distillation
from various vegetable juices and infusions of a saccharine nature
which have undevgoue vinous fermentation ; the spirituous or intoxicating element of fermented liquors."
Worcester thus :
''Alcohol.— The intoxicating principle of all spirituous liquors;
highly rectified or pure spirit obtained by distillation of the fermented solution or infusion of any substance containing sugar,

I

4

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

and thus capable of undergoing vinous fermentation ; the chemical
name of ardent spirit ; spirits of wine so called from having been
first obtained by the distillation of wine."
o
Duno-lison's
Medical Lexicon thus :
'■^Alcohol. — An Arabic word formerly used for

an

impalpable

At the present
powder and signifying ' very subtile, much divided.'
In the
day it is applied to highly rectified spirit of wine ;
rectified
is
'Alcohol
Ph. U. S. (Pharmacopoeia United States)
spirit of the specific gravity 0.835.' ' Alcohol is an inflammable
liquor, lighter than water, of a warm, acrid taste, colorless, transparent, and of a pungent, aromatic smell. It is the product of
the distillation of vinous liquors ; is miscible (mixable) with water
in all proportions and is the direct solvent of resins, balsams, etc.
Various other vegetable principles are soluble in it and hence it is
used in different states of concentration in the preparation of elixirs, tinctures, essences," etc.
The chemist has sought for the elusive essence of the article
of commerce known as alcohol for centuries, and only in very
recent times has he succeeded in stating it in the terms of his
science.
Dr. Benj. W. Eichardson, M. A., M. D., F. K. S., probably the highest European authority who has ever lived, on this
subject, after reviewing the researches of the past, says in his
Second Cantor Lecture, p. 42, "If, passing over the intervening hundred years, you asked the chemist of to-day, 'What is
alcohol ? ' he would tell you that it was an organic radical called
ethyl, combined with the elements of water. He would explain that water was no longer considered to be an element,
but to be composed of two elements called hydrogen and oxygen, two equivalents of hydrogen being combined in it with
one equivalent of oxygen. He would inform you that the
radical he had called ethyl was a compound of carbon and
hydrogen, and he would add that this radical in alcohol took
the place of one of the equivalents of hydrogen of water.
He thereupon would give you symbols for water and alcohol,
but symbols of a very different kind to those presented by his
learned predecessor. He would express the names of the elements composing the water and spirit by the first letters of
their names, and add their equivalents or parts by figures
attached to the letters.
Thus his symbols for water would

THE

scientist's

ANALYSIS

OF

ALCOHOL.

5

be H2 O ; for the radical etliyl, C^ H^; and for alcohol (C^
H&) HO or C2 H6 O.
Then we are to understand that alcohol is not ethyl any
more than alcohol is water, but a combination of the two, and
that both ethyl and water are themselves compound substances.
When the ethyl and the water combine one of the parts of
hydrogen disappears ; for whereas the ethyl has five parts,
hydrogen and the water two, mathematically there should be
seven, and actually there are but six. What becomes of it the
chemical deponent saith not, therefore we are at liberty to
infer that it is the missing link which connects the whole
thing with the devil.
I have examined the recent great work of Dr. William Hargreaves, published last year, "Alcohol and Science," and find
these high authorities agreeing ; and so we can assume that
we know common alcohol when we see it.
It is ethylic alcohol which tliis book is a])out ; the alcohol
which has laughed at the puny ravages of war, pestilence and
famine throughout the cycles of authentic history.
There are five others in the family, methylic, propylic
butylic, amylic, and caproylic ; but while these are of one blood
with the ethj'lic and have the same innate capacity for mischief, they are less demonstrative in human afiiiirs, and the plan
of this book does not require their description. Some of them
are very important and dangerous when used either by themselves or when mixed with the alcohol in common use, and the
reader interested in their further study will do well to consult
the above authorities and other recent writers, for many of the
accepted ideas even of professional men are disproved by the
late investigators.
We will, however, search for the nature of alcohol, and for
its relation to the elements of our own organism a little
further.
All vegetable forms receive their nourishment from the
atmosphere ; all animals feed either upon vegetables or upon
other animals which have been nourished by vegetables, so
that in the end animal as well as vegetable life feeds largely
if not entirely upon the air.
Although the pure air, which is most favorable to animal
life when appropriated through the lungs, is composed almost

6

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

wholly of four parts of nitrogen and one of oxygen, with a
slight admixture of carbonic acid, yet the atmosphere which
surrounds the world contains four elements, all in the gaseous
state. These are easily reducible to solid, and again to the
gaseous form by the operations of natural law. These elements
of the atmosphere and, when vitalized by the life principle, of
organic existence are oxygen, hydrogen, carbon and nitrogen.
From these plant life is supported "and they compose almost
the entire vegetable kingdom."
Few and simple as are these original elements, yet from
them nature has constructed a great variety of foods for the
sustenance of organic life.
Foods are divided into the "nitrogenized" and the "nonnitrogenized."
The latter again into three groups, all composed of the same
original substances, carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen,
but combined in varying proportions of such of them as may
enter into the composition of each particular food.
1. Sugar and saccharine substances.
2. Acids or sour substances.
3. Fats and oils.
Non-nitrogenized foods are supposed to be specially designed
for the development of heat, without which the organic processes cannot be carried on ; and it is a fact that they are found
to exist in proportions corresponding to this requirement of
life ; the fats and oils predominate in the cold regions — the
acids in the tropical regions, while all are commingled in more
nearly equal parts between the two. Heat is developed from
the carbon and hydrogen contained in them, and these elements
are found to prevail in this class of food, according to the
necessity for combustion, resulting from climatic conditions.
"Thus animal oil and blubber are furnished for the inhabitants of the higher latitudes of the polar regions ; the fruits and
acids and starch for those within the tropics ; while they are
varied and blended between the two extremes of heat and cold.
That thus the different necessities of the whole animal kingdom are provided for," is the testimony of Dr. Hargreaves
ill " Alcohol and Science."
The nitrogenized foods "are formed by the addition of
nitrogen to the elements comprising the first class."

ALCOHOL

THE PRODUCT

OF DECAY.

7

These aliments are vegetable albumen, vegetable fibrin and
vegetable casein, and from them, in use with the sugars, acids
and fats and oils, the animal economy is built up and kept in
action.
The changes produced by chemical affinity when these various
substances of the first class are brought into certain relations
to the system constitute force of which heat is the manifestation, and motion the result ; and, by the action of both affinity
and force or motion, the nourishment of the body becomes
possible and is prolonged.
Alimentary substances become exceedingly complicated in
their numerous forms and combinations, and hence from the
action of chemical laws liable to be easily dissolved by new attractions, and by the same laws reconstructed in new and it
may be non-vitalized forms.
Alcohol is not produced or obtained by any process which
forms foods, or which nourishes animal or vegetable life. It
is developed only by the putrefaction and decay of organic
forms.
NiTROGENiZED ALIMENTS are Said to be the most transient
and changeable of all organized matter. Dr. Hargreaves
further says :
"At the common temperature, under the influence of moisture and oxygen, their decomposition or putrefaction rapidly
takes place. Milk, meat, dough, etc., containing large quantities of nitrogenous matter, when placed in a moist condition,
rapidly become putrid. The nitrogenized substances not only
become rapidly putrid themselves but communicate putrefaction to the non-nitrogen ized. Pure starch, sugar, etc., are
very enduring, and are able to resist putrefaction for a long
time ; but when brought into contact with nitrogenized substances inthe process of decay, they are at once aflFected, and
go on to the same condition." "The substances," says Liebig,
"which constitute the principal mass of every vegetable, are
compounds of carbon, with oxygen and hydrogen in the proper
relative proportion for forming water. For example, a rotten
peach or apple placed in contact with one that is sound soon
causes it to rot and its atoms return to their original condition or elements : carbonic acid and water."
Having ascertained what alcohol is as developed and defined

O

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

by the highest and latest scientific investigation and authority
(and I am aware of no controversy over their conclusions) and
briefly explained the elementary structure and nourishment of
animal and vegetable life as a necessary preliminary, we can
now proceed to the actual process by which the alcohol with
which we have to deal, the alcohol of commerce, is obtained,
and to describe it in the various concrete forms, and under the
numerous names and combinations with other substances which
it assumes when it becomes a factor in human life.
The process by which alcohol is evolved is called fermentation, which is rotting, or putrefaction, and it is obtainable in
no other known way.
Fermentation is defined " as the term applied to the change
which occurs in one organic substance when brought into contact with and influenced by another in a state of decay or
putrefaction."
The non-nitrogenous substances, sugar, starch, etc., have no
power of themselves to decay ; but the nitrogenous elements,
albumen, fibrin, casein, gluten, and tissues, the mucous, etc.,
composed of them, when subjected to moderate heat and to
moisture, putrefy, and those which do so spontaneously are
called ferments. While decaying or fermenting these substances communicate their own condition to other bodies capable of decay or of separation into new combinations ; and this
power remains until decomposition has so far proceeded that
putrescence is over.
Sugar is a principal ingredient of the grape, and vinous fermentation, bywhich alcohol is chiefly produced, is occasioned
by the action "of a peculiar ferment called yeast, upon a saccharine liquid." It is believed that in all vinous fermentation
— perhaps in all fermentation — living organisms, animal or vegetable, are present, and the microscope, at least in the case of
yeast, reveals the organized and vitalized cells or globules of
which it is made.
Both Berzelius and Liebig, after strenuously denying this
theory, were finally convinced of its truth by microscopical
tests.
Fermentation proceeds at a temperature of from 60 to 80
degrees, best at about 70 degrees Fahrenheit, and "according to every theory is the process by which the food of man is

Dr.

William Hcv^gr eaves.
Author of " Alcohol and Science^

THE INGREDIENTS

OF ALCOHOL.

9

destroyed and alcohol produced." Sugar is the only constituent element from which alcohol can be produced. M. M. Duplain says : "Among the proximate principles of organic
substances, sugar alone gives occasion to vinous fermentation
from which alcohol is derived," and the great chemist, A. F.
Fourcroy, in "Philosophy of Chemistry," declares that "the
fermentation of alcohol takes place at the expense of the
destruction of a A^egetable principle."
Dr. Hargreaves adds, p. 33 of his work

already cited,

"The juices of all vegetables, and other liquids containing sugar,
are capable of alcoholic or vinous fermentation when suiEcient
albuminous matter is present to produce and sustain the process, which is usually the case when the juice of apples, pears,
peaches, currants, grapes, etc., are employed as sources of
alcohol;"
and of the "several kinds of sugar, grape
sugar alone is capable of being converted into alcohol ; the
others must be converted into grape sugar before they are
capa1)lc of the transformation." It appears to be an humble
imitation of the practice of the quack, who so treated all his
patients as to produce " fits " because that was the only disease
he knew how to cure.
"The cereals contain little sugar, but much starch which is
convertible into sugar. This is accomplished by diastase, a
peculiar ferment, which is mingled in very small proportions
with the malt. ISIalt is barley or other grain in which the
process of germination has been artificially produced and then
arrested."
If bruised malt is mingled with ground meal or any other
grain and water at the requisite temperature, the diastase of
the malt converts the additional starch into sugar. This sweet
liquid contains the newly formed grape sugar, and can be
changed into alcohol by fermentation.
Fermented liquors can be obtained from the juices of many
fruits and vegetable substances. Wine is the fermented juice
of the grape, cider of the apple ; various wines are made from
the juices of different fruits and named accordingly, as from
the currant, the elderberry and the like. Ale and beer made
from the infusion of malt, chiefly of barley, but sometimes
from other grains, are the principal fermented drinks now in

10

THE TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

use. All are alcoholic beverages, and the alcohol can be separated from them, in part at least, by distillation, a process
soon to be described.
The alcohol in fermented liquors is never more than seventeen per cent. , the remainder being mostly water ; and but for
the discovery of a means of obtaining it in more concentrated form there would be no intoxicating liquor containing a
larger proportion of alcohol.
The process of distillation however, has enabled the maker to
load any of the fermented liquors with a greater proportion of
the intoxicating element, so that now many of them are nearly
as powerful as the distilled liquors themselves.
Until the twelfth century of the Christian era only fermented
drinks in which by the laws of nature, according to Dr. Richardson, no larger proportion than seventeen per cent, could be
alcohol, were in use among the nations of Europe, or any other
portion of the earth, unless to a limited extent in China.
True, that history abounds with cases of gross individual
and national indulgence, as in that of Alexander, and of the
Babylonians in the times of Belshazzar, but all this was done
with an article of comparatively trifling potency.
In the twelfth century the learning of the world had fled to
the protection of the Arabians, and a physician named Albucassis is credited with the discovery of the process of separating more or less successfully alcohol from the innocuous fluids
with which it had until then been associated. Various authorities however are to the eff*ect that distillation was known before
the dawn of authentic history. But the matter is not important
to us.
The specific gravity of alcohol is 792 as compared with
water 1000 — about four-fifths the weight of water. Alcohol
is highly inflammable, and its atoms vaporize at forty degrees
lower temperature than water — which boils or is converted
into steam at 212 degrees F. When a quantity of fermented
liquor is confined in a vessel and subjected to a temperature of
172 degrees the particles of alcohol expand, are converted
into gas, and rise from the mass with which they have been
united.
Taking advantasje of these facts the distiller confines the

NAME

AND STRENGTH

OF ALCOHOLIC

PREPARATIONS.

11

fermented liquor in a closed vessel before the application of
heat, and connects the space in the top of the vessel with
another empty chamber by means of a "worm" or hollow tube.
When the mass is heated to the proper temperature the alcohol
leaves the water in the form of vapor and seeks the other
vessel through the tube, which, being surrounded by cold, the
vapor is condensed and finds its way into the other vessel in
the form of a liquid, from which a large proportion of the water
has disappeared. After a second distillation the result is
called spirits of wine, and after the third, rectified spirits of
wine. Owing, however, to the strong chemical afllnity of
alcohol for water, there will yet remain from ten to twenty
per cent, of water, with some other impurities, one of which
is fusel oil. Fusel oil is most abundant in spirits from Indian
corn and potatoes.
To remove the remainder of the water, and obtain anhydrous,
absolute alcohol, requires a substance having stronger affinity
for water. Lime is generally used for this purpose, but it is
for various reasons difficult to procure absolute alcohol, and
the commercial article varies greatly in actual strength.
Brandy, whisky, rum and gin are usually classed by themselves as distilled or ardent spirits, and all other spirituous
liquors as fermented. Ardent or distilled liquors contain, or
should contain, as the result of distillation, from forty per cent,
upwards of alcohol, while fermented, according to Dr. B. W.
Richardson, can contain no more than seventeen per cent, by
the natural process, and from that proportion downward even
to less than two per cent., as in small beer.
But owing to the manipulations of the maker and vendor,
with colors, drugs, gums and various ingredients and methods
of adulteration, the dilution of the stronger with water and
the fortification of the weaker with spirits, the line of distinction between distilled and fermented liquors seems to be well
nigh lost, to all save the eye of faith or of the analytical
chemist.

The following tables give the proportions of alcohol in
various liquors as stated by Brande, Bence Jones and by Prof.
John C. Draper, of the Medical College, New York.*
♦See Hargreaves, p. 37.

12

THE
Beverages.

Bourbon,
Whisky,
Eum,
Brandy,
Holland Gin,
Raisin Wine,
Maderia,
Port,
Sherry,
Claret,
Burgundy,
Champagne,
Elderberry,
Cider,
Perry,
Strong Ale,
Brown Stout,
Porter,
Small Beer,

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Number of ounces in
Alcoholic Percentage.
By Brande By Bence Jones By Prof. Draper imperial pt. of 20 ozs .

54.11
53.68
53.39
51.60
25.12
24.17
22.96
19.17
15.10
14.57
12.80
8.79
7.54
7.26
6.20
6.80
4.20
1.28

28. to 55
29. to 49

72.0 to 77.1
50.4 to 53.8
49.4 to

22. to 56

10>^ ounces.

31.
4 ounces.
4 ounces.
4^0 ounces.
2 ounces.

19.0 to 19.7
20.7 to 23.2
15.4 to 24.7
9.1 to 11.1
10.1 to 13.2
14.1 to 14.8
5.4 to

23/0
ounces.
3 ounces.

7.5

% ounce.

The following table shows the percentage of alcohol in
most European alcoholic beverages.*
BEVERAGES.
German Beer,
Cider,
Ale and Porter,
Very strong Ale,
Moselle and Rhine Wines , .
Claret,
Champagne,
Sherry,
Port,
Maderia,
Marsala,
Gin (London),
Geneva spirit,
Brandy,
Whisky,
Rum,

PERCENTAGE
from

OF ALCOHOL
1.9
5.4
5.4
10.5

u
to

7.5
8,0
11.5

u
;i

((((
(;

i(

15.4 ;(
u
10.0
19.0 u
19.9 11
31.73
((
49.4 u
50.4
59.2 ((
72.7
(I

8.5
7.4
12.4
9.5
4.62^
9.0
14.1
16.0
20.7
19.8
20.0
20.0
20.0
53.6
59.4
77.1

The alcohol contained in these liquors is not chemically combined with the rest of the mass, but maintains its individuality
for action according to its true nature whenever brought in
contact with the new surroundings whether in the human organism or elsewhere.
In this chapter I have endeavored to set forth the origin and
actual composition of the article known as alcohol in the concerns of common life.
It is a product of putrefaction ; never of any life-generating
or life-supporting process.
*See Samuelson's •' History of Drinks," page 160.
Dorchester's " Liquor Problem," page 101.

Also cited in Dr.

ALCOHOL

NO PART OF NATURE.

13

Neither plants nor animals in any of the mysterious processes of appropriation or assimilation from the soil or the air
extract or use it. It has no part in the economy of life save
only as it is forced there by the art or the unnatural appetite
of man. Nature never uses it in any of her wonderful, Godinvented methods of production, growth, or healing. All the
presumptions are against it except such as may arise from the
medicinal use which morbid and diseased conditions of the
human system, and its place among the agencies of art, may
justify, and in some cases make necessary.
In the next chapter we will inquire into the action of alcohol upon the structure of the body, and afterward upon the
intellectual and moral nature of man.

14

THE

TEMPERANCE

CHAPTER
EFFECT OF ALCOHOL

MOVEMENT.

n.

UPON THE HUMAN

BODY AND SOUL.

Liquor as an Article of Commerce — Alcohol in the Body — Importance
of Medical Testimony — The Development of Drunkenness during the
Past Three Centuries — The Experiments of Lallemand, Perrin and
Duroy — A Terrier Dog under the Influence of Liquor — The Latest
Demonstrations of Dr. Richardson — How Alcohol Travels with the
Blood, and What it does on its Travels — Experiments of Parkes and
Wallowicz on a Healthy Man — How his Heart was Affected by Alcohol
— Effect of the Social Glass at a Dinner Party.

IT is matter of common knowledge that rum, gin, brandy
and whisky, ale, beer, cider, wines, all in great variety
and with divers peculiarities of color, taste and potency, enter
largely as commercial articles into the consumption of daily
life, especially among the civilized nations of the world. In
another part of this work I shall endeavor to show approximately the tremendous proportions and effects of the traffic
in alcohol in the various disguises which it assumes in order to
catch the unwary, or to hold in its iron captivity the already
enslaved consumer. But before doing this it seems to me
more logical to ascertain from observation, experience, and
especially from scientific and professional sources, in which
from the nature of the investigation, must be the most decisive evidence, the effect of alcohol administered in these
numerous forms upon our physical, mental, and moral being.
If that influence be beneficial, it will materially change the
conclusions to which we shall arrive from the vastness of the
traffic, and will enable us to withdraw much severe comment made by "temperance fanatics," including myself as
one of the chief of sinners, so far at least as hostile intent has
been concerned ; and the remaining pages of this work shall be
devoted to the repair of past injury, real or attempted, and to
encomiums for the blessings which shall have been demonstrated to flow from the activities of this colossal trade.
Those who are engaged in producing beverages which di-

A FAIR

INQUIRY.

15

rectly affect the body and soul, whose labor, capital and
profits all depend upon a consumption which takes direct hold
of the immortal as well as the mortal nature of themselves and
of their fellow-men all made in the image of God must be willing to abide the test of a candid examination of this subject. •
If it be found that alcohol used as a beveraa-e is oood for
man, then the libels and slanders of the past must be withdrawn, and shall be so far as I am concerned ; the great moral
agencies of Christendom will hereafter lend their support
through the press, the pulpit and platform ; hostile legislation
will be repealed ; the highest and holiest energies of the race,
hitherto active for the destruction of the trade, will become
hereafter its strongest allies, and all men will unite to do
honor to these long-derided and execrated benefactors of the
race.
If the result of our examination leaves the truth in doubt,
then, while charity must hereafter suffer long and be kind,
while we must upl^raid no more, still, as alcohol is an innovator, as great, real injury is a})parent and still greater hurt
is charged and not disproved, the affirmative of the issue is
upon alcohol ; and if its advocates do not prove it to be good,
the ordinary presumption against an intruder should prevail,
and the traffic should be restrained within the limits until its
effects are shown to be not evil.
If the result of our examination should be a demonstration
beyond rational doubt tliat alcohol is in its nature hurtful in
the healthy human system, then it should not be necessary to
go further and portray the gigantic dimensions of the alleged
"crime of crimes," but upon this showing alone the waste of
useful materials should be arrested ; the perversion of productive labor and capital to pernicious uses should cease, and
the forces which now direct, as many believe at least, and as
Mr. Bourne has proved, one-tenth of all human capacity night
and day, through war and peace, remorselessly, and awfully,
to the destruction of the race, should be turned into other
fields of achievement whereon God has pronounced no curse.*
Alcohol reaches the human being through the organs of the
body — that body so fearfully and wonderfully made, the high*Bourne, on the National Expenditure on Alcohol. Statistical Journal
XLV., 1882, p. 312.

16

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

«st and most mysterious visible manifestation of the wisdom
and power of the Creator. No subject of study ever has been
or can be of such importance or of such absorbing interest to
us as this body, save alone the impenetrable spirit which
■dwells within it, and which, from its invisible but glorious
throne, with brain and hand discovering, seizing and wielding
all the forces of nature, reigns over this lower world, while
with the upturned eye of faith and conscious kinship, it
touches, as of right with spirit hand the very scepter of its
Father and its God. This wonderful and sacred structure,
the temple of the body, has been in all ages the field of profound exploration to the wisest and best men of the race. It
matters not that ignorance and imposture have infested this
holy domain. They will continue to infest it because of the
intense and constant interest which must forever surround
the subject, until science shall have completely illuminated the
most recondite secrets of our frames, and the hol}^ art of healing shall have poured its successful balm into every wound,
and found a specific for every form of disease.
That will be the golden age.
The noble profession of medicine has wrought on patiently,
fervently, honestl}'', and profoundly, from the beginning, and
will do so forever, until the race is extinct or perfection be
attained. Its votaries have been always among the most advanced thinkers, the least superstitious, the most acute and
logical investigators, and the closest in their relation to the
actual facts of human experience, in their largest variety, of
all those who have been devoted to intellectual pursuits.
More of good has come to humanity in daily ministrations
from the medical than from any other profession or class of
scientific men. JSTot always wise, not uninfluenced by the
darkness around them, its members have, nevertheless, during the lapse of ages, reared a pyramid of glory to their
profession resting upon the everlasting foundations of truth ;
and thus deservedly have won the confidence and affection of
the masses of men, in proportion to the degree of general intelligence prevailing among those who, in every grave emergency of suffering and disease, turn to their good physician
for relief.
Upon a great question like this before us, if indeed it be a

THE

QUESTION

BEFORE

THE

PEOPLE.

17

question, we must, as reasonable beings, rely upon the evidence of medical men.
I say "if indeed it be a question," because there are those
who believe that, but for the vast pecuniary interests and the
death clutch of appetite already existing, the common judgment and indignant spontaneous action of society would destroy
the liquor traffic as instinctively as we destroy the poisonous
snake. But, as things actually are, as we find them in the
daily contacts of life, we have abundant reason to bear with
one another, and to reason together upon many as open questions, which may to one of the parties seem to be already
clearly settled. So it now is in regard to the efiect of alcohol
upon the body.
The parties to this controversy cannot agree. The issue is
before the country and the world. It must be settled. The
physicians are the experts ; not all who belong to the profession
in a general way, for its departments are numerous, and each
specialty may absorb the powers of the greatest of men ; many
of the profession have never studied or observed specially with
reference to the ascertainment of the truth bearing upon our
subject. But there have been, and there now are, some of
the controlling intellects of the race, and most eminent members of the medical profession whose conclusions, based upon
scientific observation and experiment, are accepted as authoritative by their peers in other departments wherein they are
themselves "the end of the law." There are chemists who
have pursued our subject with patient and profound investigation until the truth has been revealed too vividly for contradiction. To the testimony of such men as these it is proper that
we should give heed, as do their brethren, conforming their
own faith and practice to the conclusions of the wisest and best
who have specially investigatad the subject. Upon such
evidence as this we act in all the important concerns of life ;
and he who should adopt any other rule of action would universally be dealt with as bereft of reason — a drunkard or a
fool.
Nor can we expect that all doctors will agree, for it must be
remembered that the profession is made up of men, and that, in
common with the rest of humanity, they are influenced by their
surroundings, by the traditions and circumstances and interests
2

18

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

which have enveloped them, so that, in a certain sense, they,
with the laity, are all emerging into the light together. But
we follow the lead of those nearest the sun, and who have
specially examined this subject. Thus upon the whole mass
of evidence, from every source, let us finally turn the clear,
cold, steady eye of American common sense, and decide.
Whatever may be the conclusion of American intellect, thus
formed, let us act upon it with steady and irreversible determination. Inconsidering the effect of alcohol upon the body
and mind, care should be taken to guard against any prepossession either way.
No presumption should arise from the drinking customs of
society, existing from the earliest time, in favor of this drink,
any more than in favor of war or slavery among all nations,
or the self-inflicted cruelties of superstition, the hasheesh
and opium habits, which afflict hundreds of millions of
the race, or any other admitted evil whose long existence is rather a reason for its instant removal than its
farther toleration. Any gratification, indulgence or evil whatever, which becomes entrenched in the habits and prejudices
of men, and which is the foundation of important industries
and occupations, will be sure to find hosts of friends. Its removal, however necessary, will never be popular, at least not
until the constant demonstration and iteration of startling truth
has at last aroused both the conscience and self-interest of
society as a whole. This latter stage may be nearer than we
think with the alcoholic drinking customs of the world, but in
the examination of the evidence it is important to act alike
without prepossession for that which has been because it has
been and still may be, on the one hand, or against it because
of the wrongs and crimes which are charged on the other.
We should, however, keep clearly in mind that there is no
evidence whatever, nor any pretence by any one that alcohol
is, or in any form ever was, one of the general and indispensable necessaries of life, like milk, water or bread.
At most, its use is only claimed to be desirable and pleasant
as a part of the general habit, and occasionally necessary in
sickness and emergencies. When tremendous evils are admitted to follow from its use, or its abuse, if you please, when
that abuse is shown to be the rule and not the exceDtion, the

Hon.

William

Windom,

Ex-Secrctary of the Treasury.

USE

OF

DISTILLED

LIQUORS

OF

MODERN

DATE.

19

affirmative is upon the friends of this enticing and powerful
agency .
It is said of Albucassis, the Arabian chemist, physician and
philosopher, who discovered the art of distillation in the twelfth
century, and of those who came to the knowledge of the dreadful nature of the invention, that they concealed the process
from general knowledge, so that its use for centuries was
mostly confined to the laboratory, and perhaps to some extent
was known in the practice of medicine.
However this may be, the common use of distilled liquors,
or of fermented liquors, fortified with spirits, has existed for
but two or three centuries. The result has been the development of a destructive drunkenness among civilized nations
never before known, and of something akin to the annihilation,
in some instances, of barbarous or savage tribes, with whom
their mercenary superiors have waged a deadly commerce in
these modern commodities.
The world being already enchanted and enchained by fermented drinks, and capital, appetite and labor already invested
largely in their production, and the spirit of enterprise awaking everywhere, and abandoning the fields of senseless wars
of superstition and false glory for those of maritime discovery
and colonization and for the development of the material,
political and social interests of the common people of the
world, the general application of distillation to the manufacture of alcohol necessarily followed. The liquor traffic, sanctioned bypublic toleration, based upon custom, appetite and
ignorance, developed everywhere with startling rapidity.
The existence of evils manifest to all, and of others unknown
before in like extent, traceable to no other cause, compelled
inquiry in the interest of self-preservation, and, during the last
century, the investigation has been diligently conducted by
some of the most eminent and impartial among scientists and
practitionei)S of the healing art. Their researches have been of
the most laborious, recondite and difficult character. The accomplishment oftheir task has been the work of no one man.
It was early agreed that the abuses of alcohol, in its use,
were so wide-spread and devastating as to be almost universal
in their character. But still the one vexed question, "is the
use of alcohol as a beverage injurious to the human system

20

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

in a state of health?" remained unanswered, because actual
demonstration, based upon scientific experiment, had not yet
been achieved.
In 1860, it was supposed to be settled, by the experiments
of Lallemand, Perrin and Duroy, that alcohol was never a
food ; that it never was decomposed or absorbed, but was
always a hostile and poisonous intruder in the human system.
They actually proved that alcohol was ejected from the body
in its pure, unchanged condition. They smelled it in the
breath, and in the cutaneous exhalations ; they found it in the
renal and other rejections ; the post mortem revealed it in the
drunkard's brain ; the microscope in the blood where it shriveled and coagulated the floating particles of life ; animals
living and dead were submitted to innumerable and various
experiments for a long period of time ; always these laborious
and learned observers discovered the immaculate, irreducible
article, just as it had been introduced, whether by the victim
or the investigator — the absolute alcohol.
A series of such experiments is no trifling matter ; and when
these able and faithful men had closed their labors, had written
out their conclusions, men of science, who best could judge,
rested in the belief which they announced, that alcohol " taken
into the living body accumulates in the tissues, especially in
the liver and in the brain, and that it is eliminated by the
fluid secretions, notably by the renal secretion as alcohol.
The experiments carried on by these inquiries were
^0 numerous and careful and the results they arrived at were
so definitely stated, that their labors were for a season accepted as conclusive by many men of science and by the majority
of the public. It was ascertained by other experimentalists
that alcohol is eliminated by the system in the direct way, as
alcohol, and the question of elimination rested as if it had been
solved." *
But what had actually been proven ^ Not all that was inferred, byany means. There had been — there could be no
test to prove that all the alcohol taken into the body had been
ejected.
The conclusion was too broad for the premises.
Then came the doubts of the lamented Dr. Anstie, whose
experiments and inferences with those of Dr. Thudicum, and
* Richardson's Lectures on Alcohol, p. 106.

DOUBTS

OF

DR.

ANSTIE.

21

Dupre, and Schulinus, gave great comfort to the friends of alcohol and were the medical foundation of Gov. Andrews' famous
argument before the committee of the Massachusetts legislature, in the year 1867.
"They prove that while it is true that, under certain circumstances alcohol taken into the body will pass off in the secretions unchanged, the quantity so eliminated is the merest
fraction of what has been injected ; and that there must be
some other means by which the spirit is disposed of in the
organism."*
Dr. Anstie gave to a terrier dog which weighed ten pounds,
2000 grains of absolute alcohol in ten days. On the tenth day,
from all the channels of elimination 1.13 grains were obtained.
Something was the matter with that dog, and another experiment was tried in which the same quantity of alcohol was administered, inthe same time, to another animal. On the tenth
day, two hours after the last dose — 95 grains — had been given
the animal was killed, and every particle of the body and contents subjected to analysis, and only 23.66 grains of alcohol
obtained.
This then was demonstration that Lallemand and his friends
were in error ; not in what they proved, but in what they
inferred beyond the scope of their experiments. The truth
always proves itself, but no more.
Dr. Anstie and his friends did not disprove any part of what
Lallemand had established. On the contrary he and others
demonstrated it all over again, and showed that a part of what
is taken into the system, if there be more than the system otherwise disposes of, is eliminated from the body in the form of
absolute alcohol.

Thereupon, all over the world, the other side of the controversy proceeded to infer a great deal more than Anstie and his
compeers had demonstrated, to be in their turn overthrown by
the indefatigable scientific querist.
We are apt to forget the atom of demonstration — the little
silent but mighty truth in the mass of clamorous assertion and
unwarranted inference which surrounds it. It is not necessary
for the sun to shine but once to demonstrate its power to shine,
but a thousand electric lights cannot prove it.
*Dr. Richardson, p. 107.

22

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

One real experiment is sufficient, but that experiment must
cover the case and tell the truth. The truth once told is the
truth forever.
The false inferences drawn from his experiments by others,
and perhaps also by Dr. Anstie himself, and all the arguments
and conclusions based upon them, have since been destroyed by
Dr. B. W. Richardson and other great scientists. But, before
proceeding to detail their demonstrations, I will quote the
touching tribute of Dr. Richardson to the memory of Dr. Anstie, his dead co-laborer and friend, who wrote his last paper
in the year 1874.
"Respecting this observer, whose friendship I owned for
many years, it is meet for me to pay this public tribute of
respect ; that no man I ever knew combined with vigor of
mind more incomparable industry and courage, or a more honorable regard for scientific truth and honesty. The subject
we are now considering has lost no investigator more ably
learned for the work that still remains to be done."
In stating the final, or at least the latest, demonstrations of
science upon this subject, we must follow those who made
them, Dr. Richardson and his co-laborers, and I therefore will
state the case as it stood upon the evidence when Dr. Anstie
and those who follow him left it, and the inferences then or
since entertained by them in the language of Dr. Richardson himself, which goes to the full length of all that was
demonstrated or fairly claimed in favor of the beneficial
action of alcohol upon the vital economy. "We are driven
by the evidence now before us to the certain conclusion
that in the animal body alcohol is decomposed ; that is
to say, a certain portion of it (and if a certain portion
why not the whole ?) is transmutable into new compounds. The
inference that might be drawn is fair enough that the alcohol
is lost by being burned in the body. It is lost in the body,
and out of the body it will burn. If it will burn in the organism it will supply force, for it enters as the bearer of so much
potential energy. In combining with oxygen is there then a
development of force or heat to the extent that would be developed inthe combustion of the same quantity in the lamp or.
from the distribution of it over the platinum block ? At the
same time, and in corroboration, is the product of its combus-

ALCOHOL

IN

THE

BODY.

23

tion, carbonic acid, to be discovered in the excretions? If
there be heat, and if there be product of carbon, consumed in
oxygen, then alcohol must rank as a heat-forming food," We
have here then the simple but comprehensive question :
The alcohol being in the body, and the greater part of it not
being ejected in its original state, what becomes of it, and
what efiect does it produce in its new situation?
It may be well to trace it as closely as possible in accordance with admitted facts.
Substances introduced into the body may have a mere mechanical or physiological action, or they may act as food or
nourishment of its structure.
Chloroform and opium have a marked effect upon the system,
but no one would think of classing them as foods.
"The living animal body is constructed out of a few simple
forms of matter which possess, during life, the power of motion
Whatever helps to maintain it in perfect order
of construction, whatever enables it to move of its own free
will and motion, may be considered as food." *
Here then are two classes of substances, one of which nourishes structure, the other produces motion, and in their function
as food the one builds and the other burns. The growth and
the bulk of the l)ody come from one, action from the other.
Allusion to this has been made in the tirst chapter.
Alcohol must be found among the foods, or those poisons
which, like opium, produce physiological action, or those which
go into and out of the body mechanically or remain there without structural change.
But we have already seen that alcohol is in the body for
business, and hence must be a food, or must be classed with
those other agents which produce physiological, that is functional, action — action by the organs of the body.
Alcohol may be injected under the skin into the venous
circulation. It may be taken directly to the stomach, or
absorbed through the pores, or vaporized and inhaled. In any
and in all ways, it is taken up by the appropriate vessels
and carried by the venous system to the heart. Before pure
alcohol will flow in the blood, however, it will remain in the
stomach or wherever it first finds itself, until it has attracted
* Richardson, p. 97.

24

THE

TEMPEEANCE

MOVEMENT.

water, for which it has an intense affinity, to its liking, when
it goes on its way with the tide of life. It flows with the venous
blood to the right auricle, thence downward to the left ventricle,
by which it is thrown upon the lungs, when the blood is oxygenized by contact with the atmospheric air ; thence returning to
the left auricle and to the left veuuricle, which forces the current to every tissue and fiber of the body. The arteries divide
and subdivide until in their minute extremities they become
coterminous with like infinitesimal vascular tubes, which are
the origin of the venous system. Here in these, but for the
microscope, invisible arenas the vital process is accomplished;
the exhausted and devitalized waste matter gives way to particles just from living nature, which, after organic incorporation and service are themselves rejected in their turn, the
venous mass flows on through millions of trickling rivulets into
brooks and rivers which drain the vast and mysterious system
again into the ocean of the heart. What is the power which
moves this organ with a perpetual throb, that ceases only with
life, and thus carries on this constant creation and rebuilds
this unceasing decay?
Thus alcohol travels with the blood, floating in it, not of it.
What does it on its travels ? Something thereof is known.
A little passes ofi" in expiration from the lungs — the breath
smells of it. In its passage through the minute cells or apertures which connect the arterial and venous systems it comes
in contact Avith the entire, the atomic, structure of the whole
body. In these recesses it remains, in some a longer, in others
a shorter, time. Organs like the liver and the kidneys, have
tubes through which it is rapidly taken up and eliminated
from the body — the disposition of the rest is what we are trying to find out.
It is said that unless the dose be large — semi-poisonous —
the blood is not seriously aifected. Seven hundred and ninety
parts in a thousand of the blood are water, yet if the quantity
of alcohol be great it will attack the fibrine, the plastic matter
which coagulates, and of which there are but two or three
parts in a thousand ; it also comes in contact with the albumen, of which there are seventy parts in a thousand ; with
the salts, ten parts, with the fatty matter, and then with the
blood globules, the corpuscles or cells. These are red in

EFFECT

OF ALCOHOL

IN THE BLOOD.

25

eolor and give that hue to the blood. There are white cells
also which float on the outside, next the vascular walls, while
the red globules move more quickly in the center of the tide.
The red corpuscles are the most important. They absorb
the oxygen in the lungs and distribute it in the tissues, while
they take up carbonic acid gas and carry it back to the lungs
for ejection from the system. These red blood corpuscles
are in fact the tools of the life — "the vital instruments of
the circulation." I cannot follow this matter minutely, however important it is, but must refer the reader to the professional works from which I necessarily borrow it. I can only
specify in sentences what there occupies pages. Sometimes
alcohol will cause these all important corpuscles to adhere
in rolls ; it may shrivel them up ; it may change them from
a round to an oval, or into a truncated form. This is owins:
to the power of the alcohol to chemically attract or extract
the water in the globule for itself. If the dose of alcohol
be small, it satisfies this inclination from the general mass of
water and the globule escapes.
To whatever extent the globule is affected its power to absorb gases is impaired, while changes in its mechanical form
and their aggregation interferes with their functions and Avith
their passage through the minute passages of their circuit, by
which mechanical injury is done, and the general current fails
or is impeded in its flow.
Says Dr. Richardson,
"From this distribution of blood in these minute vessels
(those connecting the arterial and venous systems) the structures of organs derive their constituent parts : through these
vessels brain matter, muscle, gland; membrane is given out
from the blood by a refined process of selection, which up to
this time is only so far understood as to enable us to say that
it exists
The minute and intermediate vessels are
more intimately connected than any other part with the construction and with the formation of the living matter of which
the body is composed." " Infinitely refined in structure, they
nevertheless have the power of contraction and dilatation,
which power is governed by nervous action of a special Mud."
It is indispensable also that I copy his description of the
dual nervous system of man.
After explaining their mechan-

26

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

ism and relations to each other he says : " Thus man has two
nervous systems : the primary nervous chain and the added
centers with their fibers. The two systems are connected bj
their fibres in difierent parts, but they are still distinct anatomically and functionally. The primary nervous system is called
the system of the organic vegetative or animal life ; it governs
all those motions which are purely involuntary, and its centers
are believed by some, and I think with perfect correctness, to
be the seats of those faculties which we call emotional and
instinctive. The centers of the brain and spinal cord with their
parts are the centers of the motor, and volitional, and of the
reasoning powers ; of all those faculties, that is to say, which are
directly under the influence of the will ;
all those
minute blood-vessels at the extremities of the circulation are
under the control of the primary or organic nervous supply ;
branches of nerves from these organic centers accompany every arterial vessel throughout the body to its termination, and without direction from our will regulate the
contraction and dilatation of the blood-vessels to their most
refined distribution."*
"It is obvious if anything occurs to cut ofi" the nervous
supply, that paralysis of the minute circulation, which is the
process of living, at each point where it is carried on, must
follow. This may occur from physical impressions ; or mental
emotion may produce the same effect ; and chemical agents can
influence the organic nervous chain so as to disturb its functions after the manner of a pure physical act.
" Still further in advance, and with the mention of the fact,
I am brought back to the subject proper of my lecture ; we
have learned that certain chemical agents can so influence the
organic nervous chain as to disturb its functions, after the
manner of a pure physical act
I divined from the
symptoms it (amyl) produced, that it influenced the organic
nervous fiber precisely after the manner of a division of that
fiber
The whole series of the nitrates possess this
power of relaxing the blood vessels at their extreme parts ;
alcohol possesses the self-same power.
It paralyzes
the minute blood vessels, and allows them to become diluted
with the flowing blood."
* Richardson, p. 81.

\

Canon

VVilberforce.

EFITECT

OF

WINE

AT

A BANQUET.

27

''If you attend a large dinner party you will observe after
the first few courses, when the wine is beginning to circulate,
a progressive change in some of those about you who have
taken wine. The face begins to get flushed, the eye brightens, and the manner of conversation becomes loud. What is
the reason of that flushing of countenance ? It is the same as
the flush from blushing, or from the reaction of cold, or from
the nitrate of amyl. It is the dilatation of vessels following
upon the loss of nervous control, which reduction has been
induced by alcohol. In a word, the first stage — the stage of
vascular excitement from alcohol — has been established. The
action of alcohol extending so far, does not stop there : with
the disturbance of power in the extreme vessels, more disturbance is set up in other organs, and the first organ that shares
in it is the heart. With each beat of the heart a certain degree of resistance is oftered by the vessels, when their nervous
supply is perfect, and the stroke of the heart is moderated
both in respect to tension and as to time ; but when the vessels are rendered relaxed, the resistance is removed, the heart
begins to run quicker — like a watch from which the pallets
have been removed — and the heart-stroke losing nothing in
force is greatly increased in frequency, with a weakened recoil
stroke
You will be interested to know to what extent
this increase of vascular action proceeds."
After detailing attempted experiments by himself which
were not satisfactory Dr. Richardson proceeds : "Fortunately
this information has been far more ably supplied by the researches of Dr. Parkes of Netley, and the late Count Wollowicz. The researches of these distinguished inquirers are
so valuable I make no apology for giving them in detail.
The observers conducted their inquiries upon a young and
healthy adult man. They counted the beats of the heart first
at regular intervals during what were called water periods,
that is to say, periods when the subject under observation
drank nothing but water ; and next, taking the same subject,
they counted the beats of the heart during successive periods
during which alcohol was taken in increasing quantities. Thus,
step by step, they measured the precise action of alcohol on
the heart, and thereby the precise primary influence induced
by alcohol.
The results are stated by themselves as follows :

Zb

EXPERIMENTS

THE

TEMPERANCE

OF DR. PARKES

MOATEMENT.

AND

COUNT

WOLLOWICZ.

"The average number of beats of the heart m 24 hours, as
calculated from eight observations made in 14 hours, during
the first or water i)eriod, was 106,000 ; in the earlier alcoholic
period it was 127,000, or about 21,000 more ; and in the later
period it was 131,000, or 25,000 more.
The highest of the daily means of the pulse observed during
the first or water period was 77.55 ; but on this day two observations were deficient. The next highest daily mean (water
days) was 77 beats.
If instead of the mean of the eight days, or 73.57, we
compare the mean of this one day, viz. : 77 beats per minute,
with the alcoholic days, so as to be sure not to overestimate
the action of the alcohol we find :—
"On the 9th day, with one fluid ounce of alcohol, the heart
beat 4,300 times more.
" On the 10th day, with two fluid ounces, 8,172 times
more.
"On the 11th day, with four fluid ounces, 12,960 times
more.
"On the 12th day, with six fluid ounces, 30,672 times
more.
"On the 13th day, with eight fluid ounces, 23,904 times
more.
"On the 14th day, with eight fluid ounces, 25,488 times
more.
"But as there was ephemeral fever on the 12th day, it is
right to make a deduction, and to estimate the number of beats
on that day as midway between the 11th and 13th days, or
18,432.
"Adopting this, the mean daily excess of beats during the
alcoholic days was 14,492, or an increase of rather more than
13 per cent.
"The first day of alcohol gave an excess of 4 per cent., and
the last of 23 per cent. ; and the mean of these two gives almost
the same percentage of excess as the mean of the six days.
"Admitting that each beat of the heart was as strono; durins:
the alcoholic period as in the water period (and it was really
more powerful) the heart on the last two days of alcohol was
doino; one-fifth more work.

EXTRA

WORK

OF THE HEART.

29

"Adopting the lowest estimate which has been given of the
daily work of the heart, viz., as equal to 122 tons lifted one
foot, the heart during the alcoholic period did daily work in
excess equal to lifting 15.8 tons one foot, and in the last two
days did extra work to the amount of 24 tons lifted as far.
"The period of rest for the heart was shortened, though,
perhaps, not to such an extent as would be inferred from the
number of beats, for each contraction was sooner over. The
heart on the fifth and sixth days after alcohol was left off, and
apparently at the time when the last traces of alcohol were
eliminated, showed in the sph^^gmographic tracings signs of
unusual feebleness ; and, perhaps, in consequence of this, when
the brandy quickened the heart again, the tracings showed a
more rapid contraction of the ventricles, but less power than
in the alcoholic period. The brandy acted, in fact, on a heart
whose nutrition had not been perfectly restored."
Commenting upon these remarkable results of experiments,
the reliability of which as data for the pul)lic to depend upon,
he avers, by adopting them as the basis of his own opinions.
Dr. Richardson says :
" It will seem at first sio;ht almost incredible that such an
excess of work could be put ui)on the heart, but it is perfectly
credible when all the facts are known. The heart of an adult
man makes, as we see above, 73.57 strokes per minute. This
number multiplied by sixty for the hour, and again by twentyfour for the entire da}^ would give nearly 106,000, as the
number of strokes per day. There is, however, a reduction
of stroke produced by assuming the recumbent position, and
by sleep, so that for simplicity's sake we may take off the
6,000 strokes, and speaking generally, may put the average
at 100,000, in the entire day.
With each of these strokes the two ventricles of the heart
as they contract, lift up into their respective vessels three
ounces of blood each, that is to say, six ounces with the combined stroke, or 600,000 in the twenty-four hours. The equivalent of work rendered by this simpler calculation would be
116 foot tons ; and if we estimate the increase of work induced
by alcohol we shall find that four ounces of spirit increase it
one eighth part ; six ounces one sixth part ; and eight ounces
one fourth part."

30

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Dr. Richardson then proceeds to trace the known action of
alcohol on the system still further ; he shows that the flush
seen on the cheek arising from the engorgement of the minute
blood vessels on the surface, the consequence of their relaxation by partial paralysis, is universal in the body — not merely
in the face, but in the brain, the lungs, the kidneys, liver,
and spleen — a universal " vascular engorgement " — that the action of alcohol being continued beyond the first stage, the function of the spinal cord is influenced, and the automatic action,
or that of a mechanical kind, which proceeds when we are
thinking or speaking of other subjects ; the process of breathing, digestion, secretion, elimination, and the like are interfered with and no longer correctly carried on.
It requires a distinct exertion of the "higher intellectual
center " that the hand may reach its object or the foot be rightly
planted ; the nervous control of the muscles is lost and the
"nervous stimulus" more or less enfeebled; and the muscles
fail in power, coming under the influence of the "paralyzing
agent," their structure temporarily deranged and their contractile power reduced. Then the cerebral or brain centres
are reduced in power, and the controlling influence of will and
judgment are lost. These centres are thrown " into chaos ; the
rational nature of man gives way before the emotional, passional, or organic part. The reason is now off duty, or is
fooling with duty, and all the mere animal instincts and sentiments are laid atrociously bare. The coward shows up more
craven, the braggart more boastful, the cruel more merciless,
the untruthful more false, and the carnal more degraded.
"/n vino Veritas" expresses even, indeed, to physiological
accuracy, the true condition. The reason, the emotions, the
instincts, are all in a state of carnival, and in chaotic feebleness.
"Finally, the action of the aiconol still extending, the superior brain centres are overpowered ; the senses are beclouded,
the voluntary muscular prostration is perfected, sensibility is
lost, and the body lies a mere log, dead by all but one-fourth,
on which alone its life hangs. The heart still remains true to
its duty, and while it just lives it feeds the breathing power,
and so the circulation and the respiration, in the otherwise inert
mass, keep the mass within the bare domain of life until the

THE

REASON

OFF

DUTT.

31

poison begins to pass away and the nervous centres to revive
again. It is happy for the inebriate that as a rule the brain
fails so long before the heart, that he has neither power nor
the sense to continue his process of destruction up to the act
of the death of his circulation. Therefore he lives to die
another day."
" Thus there are four stages of alcoholic action in the primary form ; (a) a stage of vascular excitement and exhaustion ;(b) a stage of excitement and exhaustion of the spinal
cord, with muscular perturbation ; (c) a stage of unbalanced
reasoning power and of volition ; (d) a stage of complete collapse of nervous function."
Prolonged use of the poison results in the aggravation of all
the injuries already described, in disgusting external indications of the hellish work and destructive changes of the organs
within.

CHAPTER
ALCOHOL

NOT

III.
A

FOOD.

Can it be a very Bad and a very Good Thing at the Same Time— How
Ale and Beer Fatten — Dr. Richardson's Examination of the Qualities of
Alcohol as a Food— No Claim to Efficacy in Structure Building— The
Search of the Physicians for a Virtue in Alcohol— Four Stages of
Change Produced on the Body by Liquor— How Alcohol gets out of the
Bod}' — If it is not a Food there is no Occasion for its Consumption as a
Drink.

SO far, we have traced the action of alcohol from its introduction to the body in its known effects, as demonstrated
by actual experiment, or by the admitted facts of common experience. Its action, so far, is evil, and that continually. It
would be singular if an agent which works such destruction,
should also at the same time, in the same body, exert any
beneficial effect. How can it be possible that the same thing
which, in certain quantities and methods of administration, is
known to paralyze the nervous force, to derange the circulation of the blood, dominate the muscular power, disintegrate
the vital organs, drive the heart like a slave to its task with
whip and scourge, dethrone reason and turn loose the faculties,
emotions and passions, in full riot over the prostrate moral
nature for the time, and, if long indulged, then for all time,
completely effacing the image of God, and producing a hideous
caricature abhorrent even to the beasts that perish — how can
it be possible that the agency which is admitted to do all this,
and more of horror which language cannot portray, is also a
healing angel, a nourishing mother, a messenger of life and
happiness to that normal and healthy organization which the
Almighty bestowed upon man in the beginning ? I speak not
now of what may sometimes be done by poison to arrest disease, or to mitigate the agony of the surgeon's knife.
But how is it possible that this instrumentality, offensive to
every unperverted nostril and palate — the alert natural guardians of the gate through which both structural and respiratory
32

ALCOHOL

NOT

A

FOOD.

33

foods enter the stomach and lungs, their respective digestive
laboratories — confessed to be the cause of all the destructive
consequences already set forth to human beings in health, for
whose continued welfare wholesome food and grateful beverages, wholly free from it, are necessary, can by possibility do
them any good at all ?
It is certain that we continue this search after the further
action of alcohol and its final disposition in or by the body,
with the strongest presumption that its history will be one of
consistent hurt and misery to the end.
At tliis point arises the crucial question : Is alcohol in any
quantity a food — nitrogenous, structure-building, or respiratory food— creating force ?
If it be in either way, and in any manner, and in any quantity afood, then alcohol is a good thing when properly used —
presumptions are in its favor — laws and restrictions should be
directed not to the prohibition of a bad thing, but to the prohibition ofthe unreasonable use of a good thins^.
This must be the logical result, or it must be shown satisfactorily that alcohol is a good thing, but so dangerous by
reason of the inevitable wrongs and injuries which accompany
it that for the general good it must be banished from use,
regardless of the choice of the consumer.
This question also must be determined by science. While
I am not aware that anything offensive to the unperverted
taste is a natural beverage or food, yet there are substances
and beverages which habit has made agreeable, which are injurious and even virulent poisons. Appetite and desire are
not infallible judges of the truth in case like this.
The common knowledge of mankind is not to be discarded ;
all the evidence must go to the jury, but, as in all judicial investigations, ithere
f
be questions which are beyond the control
of facts within common knowledge or experience, then those
who have special competency to testify, either to facts or to
opinions drawn from them, must be called in to settle the controversy, iso
f be that even their intelligence has yet comprehended the truth.
Is then alcohol a food?
One thing is conceded by all, and Dr. Richardson thus states
this common ground of agreement :
3

34

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

"Alcohol contains no nitrogen, it has none of the qualitiea
of these structure-building foods ; it is incapable of being transformed into any of them ; it is therefore not a food in the sense
of its being a constructive agent in the building up of the body.
In respect to this view there is, I believe now, no difference
of opinion amongst those who have most carefully observed
the action of alcohol."
The question arises then whether alcohol is a fat-forming
food, and this is in dispute. Ale and beer fatten, but it appears to be settled that it is not the alcohol but the sugar or
starch in them, and in some other drinks, which fattens. Dr.
Richardson says : "This tallies also with the observations on
the action of absolute alcohol upon inferior animals, for they
certainly, under that influence, if they are allowed liberty to
move freely, do not fatten."
Alcohol induces sleep, and the tendency to fatten may be
facilitated in that way, but the sleep itself thus induced, if not
medicinal, is an injury. "There is no chemical fact which supports the hypothesis " of the origin of fatty material direct
from alcohol.
"In conclusion, therefore, upon this one point of alcohol, its
use as a builder of the substantial parts of the animal organism, Ifear I must give up all hope of affirmative proof. It
does not certainly help to build up the active nitrogenous
structures. It probably does not produce fatty matter, except
by an indirect and injurious interference with the natural
processes."
I submit that upon any such evidence as this, which is the
most recent utterance of as competent a witness as is now living, and who, so far as I know, is uncontradicted by any witness
whose investigations are recent and accepted as authority in
the profession, while they are corroborated by many of his
associates among its most eminent members, it cannot be
claimed, that the strong presumption existing against the
probability that there is any food-creating power in alcohol,
is removed, far less is such beneficial quality established.
But may not alcohol burn in the lungs, and in the secret
places where life does its invisible work, and thus give force
and motion? What if this be so? All this is certainly done
better without than with it. Certainly, a healthy person is no

SEARCHING

FOE

A

VIRTUE.

35

better in this respect for the alcohol that is in him. Alcohol
will burn somewhat with oxygen, but not so well as pure carbon or pure hydrogen. This may liberate some heat. The
earlier physiologists of this century came, naturally enough, to
the conclusion that the alcohol taken into the body is consumed
there with the evolution of heat. Then came the investigations
of Lallemand, Perrin and Duroy in 1860, who believed that
all the alcohol taken into the body was eliminated, or remained
there unchanged ; then the investigations and theories of Dr.
Anstie and others, contradicting this view, and really leaving
the doctors undecided and disagreeing among themselves so
far as opinions and inferences are concerned ; but with the experiments of Lallemand and Dr. Anstie, both apparently
reliable, and really in no wise conflicting.
Dr. Lallemand proved that some of the alcohol ingested was
eliminated from the sj^stem of his subject unchanged, but not
all of it. Still it mio;ht have been so eliminated.
Dr. Anstie proved that most of the alcohol ingested was
not eliminated at all, because he killed the creature instantly
after the liquid was swallowed. Then he further proved that
it was decomposed in some way, because, by chemical analysis
he found that only a very small proportion of the alcohol introduced was in the body. But he killed the animal instantli/
and painlessly. Plow then could the alcohol have been burned
in the body ? AYould combustion go on after death — when respiration isstopped and the circulation forever still? If so,
and assuming that coml)ustion might go on, why not Dr. Lallemand's methods of elimination also? Besides, Dr. Anstie
must have begun his analysis at once, at least it is to be so
presumed — ^the contrary is not shown, and the analysis must
have interrupted the proceedmgs in that dog's body even if
death did not.
How did the alcohol get even out of the stomach when all
processes were instantly arrested ? How came the last ninetyfive grains of alcohol to be changed at all, and only 23.66 grains
to remain, after instant death, of the 2000 grains of pure
alcohol which that terrier dog took in ten days ? It seems to
me that there was a leak in that dog of Dr. Anstie, or in the
experiment itself. It is however accepted as a good experiment by the faculty, and as a layman I accept it in becoming

36

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

faith and acquiescence. I hope, however, that when all evidence shows that alcohol taken in large quantities lingers in the
system for days and weeks even, and Dr. Anstie's ten-pound
terrier had taken two hundred grains per diem for ten days
in succession, and then had swallowed ninety-five more as he
drew his final breath, that I may be excused from reversing all
my previous views in regard to the liquor traffic, upon the
ground that the alcohol was burned up in the dead body of
this poor dog. To my mind he died in vain. Let those explain what did become of it whose case rests upon such
questionable data.
I am content to leave the question whether or not alcohol
be respiratory or force-producing food, where it rested between
Dr. Lallemand and Dr. Anstie, as unsettled, upon the evidence
which the scientific world then possessed.
But, fortunately, that is not all of the case.
The question still remains. Is alcohol a heat-making food?
It is so, if it causes the increase of animal heat. In this connection the researches of Dr. Eichardson commenced in the
year 1864, and his conclusions, continually fortified until the
present time, are the most careful, profound, advanced and
important ever made. In no work, pretending to discuss this
all-important subject at all, would the omission of Dr. Richardson's unabbreviated account of these labors be excusable.
In his Cantor Lectures he says : " Does alcohol cause increase of animal heat ? " and proceeds with the discussion as
follows :
"In putting before you this inquiry, I am prepared to
answer by direct knowledge gained from individual experiment. In the course of some researches I had to make for
reports rendered to the British Association for the Advancement of Science, it became a part of my duty to ascertain what
effect certain chemical agents exert over the animal temperature. Amongst these agents was alcohol.
"At the time when my researches commenced — viz., in the
year 1864, there was nothing definitely known on the subject.
The thermometer was not then in such general use as it is now,
and it had not been applied, as far as I know, to this particular determination. Generally, however, it had been assumed
by a majority of persons that alcohol warms the body, and to

Hon. A. II. Colqtntt,
United States Senator Jrovi Georir/a

DR.

RICHARDSON'S

FINDINGS.

37

' take just a drop to keep out the cold' had been the practice
which the experience of ages seemed to justify. It is fair, at
the same time, to say that Dr. Lees, and some other far-seeing
observers, had for many years held and asserted a different
view. They had not entered into minuteness of experimental
detail, but they had observed from the effects of alcohol on
those who had been exposed to cold in the extreme North and
in other regions of ice and snow, that the drinkers did not live
on like other men. Thus, in so far as I had what is called
experience to guide me, I found conflict of opinion. It was
not my business, however, to accept guidance of this kind, but
to appeal to the only safe guide, the direct interrogation of
nature by experiment.
" It were impossible for me to recount the details of the long
research — extending with intervals of rest, over three years —
which was conducted in my laboratory, to determine the influence of alcohol on the animal temperature. The effects were
observed on warm-blooded animals of different kinds, including birds ; on the human subject in health, and on the same
subject under alcoholic disease. Similar experiments were
made in different external temperatures of the air, ranging
from summer heat to ten degrees below freezing point. The
whole were carried on from experiment to experiment, without regard either to comparison or result, until the general
character of the result began to proclaim that a rule existed
which could rarely be considered exceptional. The facts
obtained I may epitomize as follows :
" The progressive stages of change of animal function from
alcohol are four in number. The first is a stage of excitement,
when there exists that relaxation and injection of the bloodvessels of the minute circulation with which we have become
conversant. The second is the stage of excitement with some
muscular inability and deficient automatic control. The third
is a stage of rambling, incoherent, emotional excitement, with
loss of voluntary muscular power, and ending in helpless unconsciousness. The fourth and final stage is that in which the
heart itself begins to fail, and which death, in extreme instances
of intoxication, closes the scene. These stages are developed
in all the warm-blooded animals, and the changes of temperature throughout the whole are relatively the same.

38

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

" In the first stage the external temperature of the body is
raised. In birds — pigeons — the rise may amount to a full
decree on Fahrenheit's scale ; in mammals it rarely exceeds
half a degree, and in the confirmed inebriate, in whom the cutaneous vessels, are readily engorged, I have seen it run up to
a degree and a half. In this case the efiect on the extremities
of the nerves is that of a warm glow, like what is experienced during the reaction from cold.
" The heat felt in this stage might be considered as due to the
combustion of the alcohol ; it is not so ; it is in truth a process
of cooling. It is from the unfolding of the larger sheet of the
warm blood and from the quicker radiation of heat from that
larger surface. During this stage, which is comparatively
brief, the internal temperature is declining, the expired air
from the lungs is indicating, not an increase, but the first period
of reduction in the amount of carbonic acid, and the reddened
surface of the body is so reduced in tonicity that cold applied
to it led
increases
the observers
sufi'usion.intoIt the
is this
stage
that
the older
errormost
that deceptive
alcohol warms
the body.
"In the second stage, the temperature first comes down to
its natural standard and then declines to what is below natural.
The fall is not considerable. In birds it reaches from one and
a half to two degrees. In other animals, dogs and guinea
pigs, it rarely exceeds one degree ; in man it is confined to
three fourths of a degree. In a room heated to 65° or 70° the
decrease of animal temperature may not actually be perceived ;
but it is quickly detected if the person in whom it is present
pass into a colder atmosphere ; and it lasts, even when the
further supply of alcohol is cut ofi", for a long period — viz.,
from two and a half to three hours. It is much prolonged by
absence of food.
"During the third degree the fall of temperature rapidly
increases, and as the fourth stage is approached it reaches a
decline that becomes actually dangerous. In birds the reduction may be five degrees and a half, and in other animals three.
In man it is often from two and a half to three degrees. There
is always during this stage a profound sleep or coma, and
while this lasts the temperature continues reduced.
"It is here worthy of incidental notice that, as a rule, the

EFFECT

ON ANIMAL

HEAT.

39

sleep of apoplexy and the sleep of drunkenness may be distinguished bya marked difference in the animal temperature.
In apoplexy the temperature of the body is above, in drunkenness below, the natural standard of 98° of Fahrenheit's scale.
" Under favorable circumstances a long period is required
before the body recovers its natural warmth after such a reduction of heat as folloAVS the extreme stage of alcoholic intoxication. With the first conscious movements of recovery there
is a faint rise, but such is the depression that these very movements exhaust and lead to a further reduction. I have known
as long a period as three days required in a man to bring back
a steady, natural return of the full animal warmth.
" Through every stage , then, of the action of alcohol — barring
the first stage of excitement, I found a reduction of animal
heat to be the special action of the poison. To make the
research more perfectly reliable, I combined the action of
alcohol with that of cold. A warm-blooded animal, insensibly
asleep in the third stage of alcoholic narcotism was placed in a
chamber, the air of which was reduced in temperature to ten
degrees below freezing point, together with another similar
animal which had received no alcohol. I found that both sleep
under these circumstances, but the alcoholic sleeps to die ; the
other sleeps more deeply than is natural, and lives so long as
the store of food it is charged with continues to support life.
Within this bound it awakes, in a warmer air, uninjured though
the degree of cold be carried even lower and be continued for
a much longer time.
"One more portion of evidence completes the research on the
influence of alcohol on the animal temperature. As there is a
decrease of temperature from alcohol, so there is proportionately a decrease in the amount of the natural })roducts of
the combustion of the body. The quantit}^ of carbonic acid
exhaled by the breath is proportionately diminished v.n'th the
decline of the animal heat. In the extreme stao-e of alcoholic
insensibility — short of the actually dangerous — ^the amount of
carbonic acid exhaled by the animal and given off into the
chamber I constructed for the purpose of observation was
reduced to one third below the natural standard. On the
human subject in this stage of insensibility the quantity of
carbonic acid exhaled has not been measured, but in the earlier

40

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

stage of alcoholic derangement of function the exhaled gas was
measured with much care by a very earnest worker, whose
recent death we have also to deplore — Dr. Edward Smith.
In these early stages Dr. Smith found that the amount of carbonic acid was reduced in man, as I have found it in the lower
animals, so that the fiict of the general reduction may be considered as established beyond disputation. We are landed
then at last on this basis of knowledge. An agent that will
burn and give forth heat and product of combustion outside
the body, and which is obviously decomposed within the body,
reduces the animal temperature, and prevents the yield of so
much product of combustion as is actually natural to the
organic life.
" What is the inference ? The inference is that the alcohol is
not burned after the manner of a food which supports animal
combustion, but that it is decomposed into secondary products, by oxidation, at the expense of the oxygen which ought
to be applied for the natural heating of the body.
"For some time to come the physiological Avorld willbe studiously intent on the discovery of the mode by which alcohol
is removed from the organism. It is a subject on which I one
day shall be able to speak, I hope, with some degree of experimental certainty, but on which at this moment I am not prepared to offer more than an indication of the probable course
of research. I may venture to add in advance two or three
suggestions to which my researches, so far as they go, point.
" Firstly, I believe there is a certain determinable degree of
saturation of the blood with alcohol, within which degree all
the alcohol is disposed of by its decomposition. Beyond that
dejrree the oxidation is arrested, and then there is an accumulation of alcohol, with voidance of it, in the unchanged state
in the secretions.
" Secondly, the change or decomposition of the alcohol in its
course through the minute circulation, in which it is transformed, isnot into carbonic acid and water, as though it were
burned, but into a new soluble, chemical substance, probably
aldehyde, which returns by the veins into the great channels
of the circulation.
"Thirdly, I think I have made out that there is an outlet for
the alcohol, or for the fluid product of its decomposition, into

DR.

RICHARDSON'S

rESTDINGS.

41

the alimentary canal, through the secretion of the liver. Thrown
into the canal, it is, I believe, subjected there to further oxidation, isin fact oxidized by a process of fermentation attended
with the active development of gaseous substances. From
this surface the oxidized product is in turn re-absorbed in great
part and carried into the circulation, and is disposed of by
combination with bases or by further oxidation.
"Here, however, I leave the theoretical point to revert to
the practical, and the practical is this : that alcohol cannot by
any ingenuity of excuse for it be classified amongst the foods
of man. It neither supplies matter for construction nor heat.
On the contrary, it injures construction and it reduces temperature."
It must follow that, if alcohol be not a food at all, there
is no occasion for its consumption as a drink until harmless
beverages are exhausted ; and, if that consumption be attended
with great evils, there can be no excuse to society for permitting the traffic in spirits as a beverage.

ALCOHOL

CHAPTER

IV.

AGAINST

THE

BODY.

Dr. Richai'dson's Investigations Continued — Experiments with a Frog —
Alcohol as a Regular Stimulant a Delusion — How Light Drinkers are
Affected — Effect on the Heart and other Organs — How Disease is Originated— When the Memory becomes a Victim of the Habit — Gradual
StejDS of Physical Degeneration through Use of Liquor.
jHERE are several other important questions arising upon
which I will now cite the conclusions of Dr. Richardson,
based largely upon his own labors and experiments, assisted
by his profound and universal knowledge of all that had been
done and ascertained by other investigators in the same field
of inquiry.
In considering the importance of experiments upon animals
it should be known that it is considered as demonstrated,
that alcohol has the same eifect upon the inferior warm-blooded
animals as upon man, except, of course, that higher nature
which belongs only to him. In his Cantor Lectures, p. 118,
Dr. Richardson says :
" There is nothing in what we see relating to the action of alcohol
in man that would lead us to suppose it capable of giving an increased
muscular power, and it is certain that animals subjected even for
short periods of time to its influence lose their power for work in a
marked degree. Indeed, if we were to treat our domestic animals
with this agent in the same manner that we treat ourselves, we
should soon have none that were tamable, none that were workable,
and none that were edible. I thought it, nevertheless, worth the
inquiry whether at any stage ' of the alcoholic excitement living
muscle could be induced to show an extra amount of power. I
therefore submitted muscle to this test : I gently weighted the
hinder limb of a frog until the power of contraction was just overcome, then by a measured electrical current I stimulated the muscle
to extra contraction, and determined the increase of weight that
could thus be lifted. This decided upon in the healthy animal, the
trial was repeated some days later on the same animal after it had
received alcohol in sufficient quantities
to induce the various stages
42

A FROG

IN

THE

CASE.

43

of alcoholic modification of function. The result was that through
■ every stage the response to the electrical current was enfeebled, and,
as soon as narcotism was developed by the spirit, it was so enfeebled
that less than half the weight that could be lifted in the previous
trial, by the natural effort of the animal, could not now be raised
even under the electrical excitement.
"In man and animals, during the period between the first and
third stages of alcoholic disturbance, there is often muscular excitement, which passes for increased muscular power. The muscles are
then truly more rapidly stimulated into motion by the nervous
tumult, but the muscular power is actually enfeebled.
"I am bound to intimate that the popular plan of administering
alcohol for the purpose of sustaining the animal warmth is an entire
and dangerous error, and that when it is brought into practice during
extremely cold weather it is calculated to lead even to fatal consequences, from the readiness with which it permits the blood to
become congested in the vital organs. AVhenever we see a person
disposed to meet the effects of cold by strong drink it is our duty
to endeavor to check that effort, and whenever we see an unfortunate person under the influence of alcohol it is our duty to suggest
warmth as the best means for his recovery.
" Once more : I would earnestly impress that the systematic administration of alcohol for the purpose of giving and sustaining
strength is an entire delusion. I am not going to say that occasions do not arise when an enfeebled or fainting heart is temporarily
relieved by the relaxation of the vessels which alcohol, on its diffusion through the blood, induces ; but that this spirit gives any persistent increase of power, by which men are enabled to perform
more sustained work, is a mistake as serious as it is universal.
"Again, the belief that alcohol may be used with advantage to
fatten the body is, when it is acted upon, fraught with danger.
For if we could successfully fatten the body we should but destroy
it the more swiftly and surely ; and as the fattening which follows
the use of alcohol is not confined to the external development of fat,
but extends to a degeneration through the minute structures of the
vital organs, including the heart itself, the danger is painfully
apparent.
" In conclusion, whatever good can come from alcohol, or whatever evil, is all included in that primary physiological and luxurious
action of the agent upon the nervous supply of the circulation to
which I have endeavored so earnestly to direct your attention. If
it be really a luxury for the heart to be lifted up by alcohol, for the
blood to course more swiftly through .the brain, for the thoughts to
flow more vehemently, for words to come more fluently, for emotions

44

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

to rise ecstatically and for life to rush on beyond the pace set by
nature, then those who enjoy the luxury must enjoy it— with the
consequences."
Having given great but deserved prominence to the investigations of Dr. Richardson and to his conclusions, which are
adverse to alcohol as the source of any good to the human system in health, I will cite his testimony in regard to the injury
and destruction it uniformly produces, with comparative brevity. It should be borne in mind that when scientists speak of
the action of alcohol, they refer to pure or absolute alcohol,
and that in whatever drink or potion alcohol is administered,
whether rum or whisky, or ales, or cider or wines, alcohol is
the one common element which makes them all akin ; that it
exists in them all free, not in chemical combination ; it is pure
alcohol still ; and that when enough of the mass has been
taken to include the given amount of alcohol, the same alcoholic
effect uniformly follows. But for this circumstance, the water
and adulterations with which it is administered, would have
few charms for the consumer.
Dr. Richardson in his fifth lecture first speaks of the addition of foreign substances to alcohol and the water, with which
it is, of course, always found as a commodity in the market.
He says : " Something less of evil than now obtains would
be secured if none but natural wines and ales were taken by
the people. A honafide wine derived from the fermentation
of the grape purely cannot contain more than 17 per cent, of
alcohol, yet our staple wines, by an artificial process of fortifying and brandying, which means the adding of spirit, are
brought up in sherries to twenty, and in ports to even twentyfive, per cent. Some wines and spirits are believed to be
charged with amylic alcohol. Other wines are charged with
foreign volatile substances to impart what is called bouquet ;
and still other so-called wines — I allude specially to the effervescing liquids sold under that name — are actually often undergoing the fermenting process at the time they are imbibed,
and thus are invited to complete their fermentation in that
sensitive bottle, the human stomach."
Of absinthe, a common agent of adulteration increasing in
use, he says : "The intentional additions of poisonous agents

=:\

V
.*'

Dr. Daniel Doi'chester^
Author of " The Liquor Problem^

HOW

DISEASE

ORIGINATES.

45

to the alcohol of ales, wmes and spirits, pale when absinthe
appears in sight, but they are not to be ignored."
But on the whole he appears, like many other observers, to
be of the opinion that it is difficult to adulterate or mix alcoholic drinks, whether fermented or distilled, with anything
which will make them worse than the alcoholic poison itself.
Resuming now the main subject, he says: ''A minority of
persons who habitually take alcohol escape with impunity
from injury."
Some escape because they use it in such small quantities and
with such regularity — others take more freely and escape because they are physiologically peculiar and rapidly eliminate
the fluid from their bodies, I suppose, like the drinker who
defended alcohol by saying that he had used it until he was an
old man, and until he had killed ofi" three generations of boon
companions who in succession had drank with him, and been
buried by him.
Dr. Richardson continues :
" The large majority of those who drink alcohol in any of its
disguises are injured by it. As a cause of disease it gives origin to great populations of afflicted persons, many of whom
suflfer even to death without suspecting from what they suffer,
and unsuspected. Some of these live just short of the first
stage of old age ; others to middle age ; others only ' to ripe
adolescence.'
" Continued daily it induces a new physiological and altogether unnatural condition, in which the sense of acquired
necessity enforces desire, until at last the spirit is made to become a positive requirement of the organic and mental life.
Every extra effort must be preceded by resort to the stimulant. Every prolonged weariness must be relieved by the
same measure, but when the effect of the stimulant has speedily subsided there is left a greater exhaustion than before.
Another resource to the artificial aid completes the exhaustion,
and makes it pass into dullness and drowsiness, without natural
and sound sleep, and with an unbearable sense of after prostration.
" Unfortunately, it is the rarest of events that a person artificially stimulated by alcohol to the period named, gives up
the practice." But when the body is fully developed ; when
the extra vital capacity which attended youth is expended in

46

THE

TEMPEEANCE

MOVEMENT.

growth and development ; when all the organs have assumed
their full size and activity ; when the balance of secretion is
so nicely set in all parts that not one secretion can be disturbed
without a disturbance of the whole ; when the spring of the
elastic tissues is reduced ; when the lungs cannot fail ever so
little in their function of throwing off the gaseous products of
combustion without a vicarious extension of gases into the alimentary canal ; when the completed organic moving parts become encumbered with fatty matter interposed between them,
or laid out around them, then the effect of alcoholic spirits begins to be realized. The fluid is now retained longer in the
living house ; is decomposed less quickly ; is thrown out by
primary or secondary elimination less speedily. Under this
persistent pressure upon the vessels of the minute circulation,
their diameters change in the course of time, and the whole of
the marvelous web-work of blood-vessels, upon which the
organs of the body are constructed, is deranged in its mechanical distribution over the whole surface, and the function of the
heart becomes perverted ; (p. 143) . Whipped by the unnatural
master it develops undue size and power, demands its stimulus
more and more, and communicates its own excited condition
to the whole circulation, and to all the organs which are fed by
it, so that the whole system appreciates " with abnormal sensitiveness the whip of the stimulus and the languor when the
whip is withheld." "The heart not only becomes enlarged,
but its various valvular and other mechanical parts subjected
to prolonged strain are thrown out of proportion. The orifices in it, through which the great floods of blood issue in
their courses, are dilated. The exquisite valves become
stretched and prevented from assuming their refined adaptations. The minute filamentous cords which hold the valves in
due position and tension are elongated, and the walls of the
ventricles or forcing chambers are thickened, or, as we say,
technically, are hypertrophied. Throughout the whole of its
structures the central throbbing organ is modified both in its
mechanism and in its action."
" But such central modification cannot possibly go on long
without the institution of other changes at the opposite extremity or circumference of the circuit of the blood. At one
moment the vital organs feel the pressure of the too powerful

EFFECTS

ON THE ORGANS.

47

stroke of blood ; at another moment they are suddenly aware
of an enfeebled stroke. The brain is, for the instant, conscious
of a flicker of power ; it is like the faintest flicker of gas,
which is observed when, by an accident, the pressure is disturbed at the main, but it is there, and the person who
experiences it is cognizant of its central origin. So matters
progress often for months, or for years, without further evidence of subjective or objective sign of increasing evil. The
worst evidence that exists is, probably, the necessity for a
more frequent repetition of the stimulus under additional stress
of work or excitement. While these changes in the simple
mechanism of the circulation are in a course of advancement
there are also in development certain other changes which are
much more delicate and minute, yet not less important.
These consist of direct deteriorations of structure of the organic tissues themselves."
Discussing now the effect of alcohol upon the structures of
the body Dr. Richardson proceeds : " The parts which first
sufler most from alcohol are those expansions in the animal
body which the anatomists call the membranes. The membranes are colloidal structures, and every organ is enveloped
in them. The skin is a membranous envelope. Through the
whole of the alimentary surface, from the lips downwards, and
through the bronchial passages to their minute ramifications,
extends the mucous membrane . The lungs , the heart, the liver ,
the kidneys are folded in delicate membranes which can be
stripped easily from these parts. If you take a portion of bone,
you will find it easy to strip off from it a membranous sheath or
covering; if you open and examine a joint you will find both
the head and the socket lined with membrane. The whole of
the intestines are enveloped in a fine membrane called peritoneum. All the muscles are enveloped in membranes, and
the fasciculi or bundles and fibers of muscles have their membranous sheathing. The brain and spinal cord are enveloped
in three membranes, one nearest to themselves, a pure vascular
structure, a net-work of Ijlood-vessels ; another, a thin, serous
structure ; a third, a strong, fibrous structure. The eyeball
is a structure of colloidal humors and membranes, and of
nothing else. To complete the description, the minute structures of the vital orsrans are enrolled in membranous matter.

48

THE TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

"The membranes are the filters of the body. In their absence there could be no building of structure, no solidification
of tissue, no organic mechanism. Passive themselves, they
nevertheless separate all structures into their respective positions and adaptations."
" See then what an all-important part these membranous
structures play in the animal life. Upon their integrity all
the silent work of the building up of the body depends. If
these membranes are rendered too porous, and let out the colloidal fluids of the blood — the albumen for example — ^the body
so circumstanced dies — dies as if it were slowly bled to death.
If, on the contrary, they become condensed or thickened, or
loaded with foreign material, then they fail to allow the natural
fluids to pass through them. They fail to dialyse, and the
result is either an accumulation of the fluid in a closed cavity,
or contraction of the substance inclosed within the membranes,
or dryness of membrane in surfaces that ought to be freely
lubricated and kept apart. In old age we see the efiects of
modification of membrane naturally induced ; we see the fixed
joint, the shrunken and feeble muscle, the dimmed eye, the
deaf ear, the enfeebled nervous function.
"Upon all these membranous structures alcohol exerts a
direct perversion of action. It produces in them a thickening,
a shrinking and an inactivity that reduces the functional power.
That they may work rapidly and equally they require to be at
all times charged with water to saturation. If into contact
with them any agent is brought that deprives them of water,
then is their work interfered with ; they cease to separate the
saline constituents properly, and, if the evil that is thus started
be allowed to continue, they contract upon their contained
matter in whatever organ it may be situated, and condense it."
" The ultimate changes that follow the use of alcohol by those
who indulge in it, in what is too often considered a temperate
degree, are actual local changes within one or the other of the
vital organs. .... An extreme emotional derangement is
often produced. The afilicted man — and I fear I must say
woman also, for women are sometimes afilicted — the afilicted
man under this primary prolonged influence of alcohol becomes
nervous and excitable, ready at any moment to cry or laugh,
without valid reasons for either act. The emotional centers

LIGHT

DRINKERS.

49

are alternately raised and depressed in function by the poison,
but after a time the depression overcomes the exhilaration, and
the impulse is to a maudlin sentimentality extending even to
tears. The slightest anxieties are then exaggerated, and there
is experienced at the same time an indecision and deficiency
of self-confidence which is doubly perplexing. When an act
is done, when a letter, for instance, or other piece of business
has been finished and despatched, an uneasy feeling of distrust
is felt that perhaps some mistake has been made, which distrust passes rapid!}- into a sentiment that the thing cannot be
helped ; it is bad luck, but it must take its chance. In various
other directions this distrust shows itself, and the worst of all
is that the very doubt prompts the desire for another application for relief to the evil that is the cause of this burthen. A
small dram more of the stimulant, not an overpowering draught
that will cause quick and sure insensibility, but just a mouthful ;that is the assumed remedy, and that is the certain
promoter of the sorrow.
"We know now, as surely as if we could see within the
body, what is the condition of the organs of the person afiiicted
in the manner thus defined. We are conscious that the vessels of the brain, of the lungs, of the liver, of the kidneys, of
the stomach are paralyzed, and are injected to full distention
with blood. Some of these parts have actually been seen
under this state, and the fact of the rejected condition directly
demonstrated."
" Of all the systems of the organs that sufier under this sustained excitement and paralysis, two are injured most determinately — viz., the digestive and the nervous. The stomach,
unable to produce in proper quantity the natural digestive
fluid, and also unable to absorb the food which it may imperfectly digest, is in constant anxiety and irritation. It is
oppressed with the sense of nausea ; it is oppressed with the
sense of emptiness and prostration ; it is oppressed with a
sense of distention ; it is oppressed with a loathing for food,
and it is teased with a craving for more drink. Thus there is
engendered a permanent disorder which, for politeness' sake
is called dyspepsia, and for which difierent remedies are often
sought, but never found. Antibilious pills — whatever they may
mean — Seidlitz powders, eflervescing waters and all that phar4

50

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

macopoeia of aids to further indigestion, in which the afflicted
who nurse their own diseases, so liberally and innocently indulge, are tried in vain. I do not strain a syllable when I
state that the worst forms of confirmed indigestion originate in
the practice that is here explained. By this practice all the
functions are vitiated, the skin at one moment is flushed and
perspiring, at the next is pale, cold and clammy, and every
other secreting structure is equally disarranged.
"The nervous structures follow, or it may be precede, the
stomach in the order of derangement.
"The perverted condition of the membranous covering of
the nerves gives rise to pressure within the sheath of the
nerve, and to pain as a consequence. To the pain thus excited
the term neuraliga is commonly applied ; or tic ; or, if the
large nerve running down the thigh to the seat of the pain,
'sciatica.' Sometimes this pain is developed as a toothache.
It is a pain commencing in nearly every instance at some point
where a nerve is inclosed in a bony cavity, or where a pressure
is easily excited, as at the lower jaw-bone near the center of
the chin, or at the opening in front of the lower part of the
ear, or at the opening over the eyeball in the frontal bone."
Then follows alcoholic insomnia, or sleeplessness — inability
for natural sleep. "Connected with this sleep there is engendered in some persons a form of true epilepsy which all the
skill of physic is hopeless to cure until the cause is revealed
and removed." The doctor says: " The continuance of the
efiects of alcohol into a more advanced stage leads to direct
disorganization of vital structures. When once this stage has
been reached not one organ of the body escapes the ravage.
In the blood the influence is exerted upon the plastic
fibrine and upon the corpuscles ; in the brain, on the membranes at first, and afterwards on the nervous matter they
enclose ; in the lungs, on the elastic, spongy, connective tissue, which is, strictly speaking, also membranous ; in the heart,
on its muscular elements and membranes ; in the liver, primarily on its membranes ; in the kidneys, on their connective tissues and membranes."
"The organ of the body that perhaps the most frequently
undergoes structural changes from alcohol is the liver. The
capacity of this organ for holding active substance in its eel-

HOW

THE

LIVER

IS AFFECTED.

51

lular parts is one of its marked physiological distinctions. In
instances of poisoning by arsenic, antimony, strychnine, and
other poisonous compounds, we turn to the liver, in conducting our analyses, as if it were the central depot of the foreign
matter. It is practically the same in respect of alcohol. Th©
liver of the confirmed alcoholic is probably never free from the
influence of the poison ; it is too often saturated with it. The
organ at first becomes large from the distention of its vessels,
the surcharge of fluid matter and the thickening of tissue
After a time there follow contraction of membrane and slow
shrinking of the whole mass of the organ in its cellular parts.
Then the shrunken, hardened, roughened mass is said to be
'hobnailed,' a common but expressive term. By the time this
change occurs the body of him in whom it is developed is
usually dropsical in its lower parts, owing to the obstruction
offered to the returning blood by the veins, and his fate is
sealed."
"I touch with the lightest hand upon these deteriorations,
and I omit many others. ]My object is gained if I but impress
you with the serious nature of the changes that, in this one
organ alone, follow an excessive use of alcohol."
"The kidney, in like manner with the liver, suffers deterioration of structure from the continued influence of alcoholic spirit.
Its minute structure undergoes fatty modifications ; its vessels
lose their due elasticity and power of contraction ; or its membranes permit to pass through them that colloidal part of the
blood which is known as albumen. This last condition reached,
the body loses power as if it were being gradually drained
even of its blood. For this colloidal albumen is the primitively
dissolved fluid out of which all the other tissues are by dialytical process to be elaborated. In its natural destination it has
to pass into and constitute every colloidal part."
"The lungs do not escape the evil influence that follows the
persistent use of alcohol. They indeed probably suffer more
than we at present know from the acute evils imposed by this
agent. The vessels of the lungs are easily relaxed by alcohol ;
and as they of all parts are most exposed to vicissitudes of
heat and cold they are readily congested when, paralyzed by
the spirit, they are subjected to the effects of a sudden fall of
atmospheric temperature.
Thus the suddenly fatal conges-

52

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

tions of lungs which so easily befall the confirmed alcoholic
during severe winter seasons."
Drunkards have also a form of consumption all their own,
which attacks those who have the strongest constitutions and
who have withstood almost every other disease and shock.
■''The origin of this series of changes from alcohol is again from
the membranes. The course of it is through the membranous
tissues. The vessels give way after a severe congestive condition, and blood is exuded or extravasated into the lung.
These conditions lead to the destruction of the substance of the
pulmonary organs, upon which, and upon the organic changes
that follow such destruction, the acute symptoms of the malady under consideration become quickly and fatally pronounced."
"The membranous structures which envelope and line the
heart are changed in quality, are thickened, rendered cartilaginous and even calcareous or bony. Then the valves, which
are made up of folds of membrane, lose their suppleness, and
what is called valvular disease is permanently established.
The coats of the great blood-vessel leading from the heart,
the aorta, share, not unfrequently, in the same changes of
structure, so that the vessel loses its elasticity and its power
to feed the heart by the recoil from its distention after the
heart by its stroke has filled it with blood."
"Again the muscular structure of the heart fails, owing to
degenerative changes in its tissue. The elements of the muscular fibre are replaced by fatty cells ; or if not so replaced are
themselves transferred into a modified muscular texture in
which the power of contraction is greatly reduced .... The
jaded, overworked, faithful heart will bear no more ; it has
run its course, and the governor of the blood stream broken,
the current either overflows into the tissues, gradually damming up the courses, or under some slight shock or excess of
motion ceases at the center."
The eye also is oftentimes greatly injured and soon destroyed"; and lastly the brain and spinal cord and all the nervous matter become, under the influence of alcohol, subject,
like other parts, to organic deterioration. The membranes
enveloping the nervous substance undergo thickening ; the
blood-vessels are subjected to change of structure, by which

WHEN

THE

MEMORY

IS

A

VICTIM

53

their resistance and resiliency is impaired ; and the true nervous matter is sometimes modified by softening or shrinking of
its texture, by degeneration of its cellular structure, or by
interposition of fatty particles."
" These deteriorations of cerebral and spinal matter give rise
to a series of derangements, which show themselves in the
worst forms of nervous disease — epilepsy; paralysis, local or
general; insanity." ....
"One of the first efiects of alcohol upon the nervous system
in the way of alienation from the natural mental state is shown
in loss of memory. This extends even to forgetfulness of the
commonest of things ; to names of familiar persons ; to dates ; to
duties of daily life. Strangely, too, this fiiilure, like that which
indicates in the aged the era of second childishness and mere
oblivion, does not extend to things of the past, but is confined
to events that are passing. On old memories the mind retains
its poAver ; on new ones it requires prompting and sustainment.
.... The failure of speech indicates the descent still deeper
to that condition of general paralysis in which all the higher
faculties of mind and will are poAverless, and in which nothing
remains to show the continuance of life except the parts that
remain under the dominion of the chain of organic or vegetable nervous matter. Our asylums for the insane are charged
with these helpless specimens of humanity."
"A second efiect of alcohol on the mental organization is the
production of that craving for its incessant supply to which we
give the name of dipsomania. It is those who are afi'ected with
this form of alcoholic disease a mixed madness and insanity
is established, in which the cunning of the mind alone lives
actively with the vices that ally themselves to it. The arrest
of nervous function is partial and does not extend to the motor
centers so determinately as to those of the higher reasoningfaculties. But the end, though it maj'^ be slow, is certain, and
the end is, as a rule, that general paralysis which I have just
described. The dipsomaniac is, however, capable of recovery
within certain limits on one and only one condition, that the
cause of his disease be totally withheld."
"The effect of alcohol on the mental functions is shown in yet
another picture of humanity writhing under its use. I mean in
the form of what may be called intermittent indulgence to dan-

54

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

gerous excess . This form of disease has been named the mania
a potu, and is one of the most desperate of the alcoholic evils.
The victims of this class are not habitual drunkards or topers,
but at sudden intervals they madden themselves with the spirit ;
they repent ; reform ; get a new lease of life ; relapse. In intervals of repentance they are worn with remorse and regret ; in
the intervals of madness they are the terrible members of the
community. In their furious excitement they spread around
their circle the darkness of desolation, fear and despair.
Their very footsteps carry dread to those who, most helpless
and innocent, are under their fearful control. They strike
their dearest friends ; they strike themselves. Retaining
sufficient nervous power to wield their limbs, yet not sufficient to guide their reason, they become the dangerous alcoholic criminals whom our legislators, fearing to touch the
cause of their malady, would fain try to cure by scourge and
chain.
"To us physiologists these "'^maniacs apotu^' are men under
the experiment of alcohol, with certain of their brain centers
(which I could fairly define if the present occasion were befitting) paralyzed, and with a broken balance, therefore, of brain
power, which we with infinite labor and much exactitude have
learned to understand. Our remedy for such aberration of
nervous function, if we were legislators, would be simple
enough. We should not whip the maniac back again to the
drink ;' we should try to break up the evil by taking the drink
from the maniac. But then we are only physiologists. We
have nothing to do with that £117,000,000 of invested capital,
and we are not practical in reference to it."
" The • most solemn fact of all bearing upon these mental
aberrations produced by alcohol, and upon the physical not
less than the mental, is that the mischief on man by his own
act and deed cannot fail to be transferred to those who descend
from him and who are thus irresponsibly afflicted. Amongst
the many inscrutable designs of nature none is more manifest
than this, that physical vice, like physical feature and physical
virtue, descends in line. It is, I say, a solemn reflection, for
every man and every woman, that whatever we do to ourselves so as to modify our own physical conformation and
mental type, for good or for evil, is transmitted to genera-

THE CANCEROUS
STOMACH.

DR.

RICHARDSON'S

VERDICT,

55

tions that have yet to be. Not one of the transmitted wrongs,
physical or mental, is more certainly passed on to those yet
unborn than the wrongs which are inflicted by alcohol. We,
therefore, who live to reform the present age in this respect
are stretching our powers to the next to purify it ; to beautify, and to lead it toward that millennial happiness and
blessedness, which in the fullness of time shall visit even the
earth, making it under an increasing light of knowledge a
garden of human delight, a Paradise regained."
" In summary of what has past, I may be briefness itself," says Dr. Richardson. " The chemical substance alcohol— an artificial product devised by man for his purpose, and
in many things that lie outside his organism a useful substance— is neither a food nor a drink suitable for his natural
demands. Its application as an agent that shall enter the living organization is properly limited by the learning and skill
possessed by the physician — a learning that itself admits of
being recast and revised in many important details and perhaps
in principles.
"If this agent do really for the moment cheer the weary
and impart a flush of transient pleasure to the unwearied who
crave for mirth, its influence (doubtful even in these modest
and moderate degrees) is an infinitesimal advantage, by the side
of an infinity of evil for which there is no compensation and
no human cure."

CHAPTER
SCIENTIFIC

V.

INVESTIGATIONS.

When Liebig's Theory was Supreme — Alcohol in the Brain of a Dead
Debauchee — The Alcoholic AliDhabet — How the Liquor gets out of the
Body — Is it Poison, Food, or Medicine ?— How the Dictionaries define
the Terms — Dr. Hammond's Experiments with a Dog. — His List of
Diseases created by the use of Alcohol — His Letter to the Author —
Literal Meaning of the Word " Intoxication " — The use of Poisons for
Medical Purposes — The use of Beer — Its Stupefying Effects on its Devote s— The Cruel Results which have followed the wide use of Beer —
How Old Appetites have been awakened and New Ones created.
^RIOR to tlie investigations of Lallemand, Perrin and
Duroy, already briefly considered, which were very
minute and extensive, and continued for several years, and the
first account of which was published in 1860, the theory of
Liebig, that alcohol was decomposed and furnished heat to the
system, and that no part of it left the body unchanged, but
combining with oxygen passed out as carbonic acid and water,
was generally embraced. He did not, by his theory, however,
oppose total abstinence, because he admitted that fat was much
better as a heat producer, and of far more value. His ipse dixit
made, it is said upon very slight investigation, seems to have
been accepted on account of his great fame, and has since been
completely overthrown. Just what is the method of action of
alcohol in the body is still in doubt, but some great errors
have been corrected, and, facts which control the question as
one of practical consequence to society, have been firmly
established since Liebig's day. It is not known that any alimentary substance passes the system without change unless
the organs fail of their function, as in case of diabetes and
albuminaria.
In 1831, Dr. James Kirk, of Scotland, found alcohol in the
brain of a dead debauchee, and burned it in a spoon. Dr
Ogston examined the body of a woman who, being drunk, fell
into the Aberdeen canal and 56was drowned, and with two of

AI^COHOLIC

ALPHABET.

57

his brethren as witnesses took four ounces of pure alcohol
from the ventricles. These statements being considered remarkable, and, if true, being considered fatal to the Liebig
theor}^ Dr. Percy instituted a series of experiments on both
men and animals, and proved clearly that the fluid was of alcoholic character, by its inflammability and its power to dissolve
camphor. He proved that alcohol caused death by its specific
efiect upon the nerve centers and not by coagulating the blood,
as taught by Orfila. These experiments of Dr. Percy were
made in 1839, but do not appear to have been very well known,
or if known they failed to prevent the general acceptance of
the Liebig theory.
Various other experimenters confirmed the Liebig view in a
general way, and Buckheim, a high authority, disproved their
conclusions in turn, and thus the question stood in 1860.
These experiments of Lallemand and his associates are a
landmark. Dr. Lees has made the following translation of
then' results which he styles the Alcoholic Alphabet :
ALCOHOLIC

ALPHABET.

A. Alcohol ingested into the stomach, appHed to the skin, or
introduced as a vapor into the lungs, is absorbed into the veins, and
carried by the blood into all the tissues.
B. The injection of alcohol produces upon animals an intoxication that is marked by a progressive series of functional disturbances and alterations, the intensity of which corresponds with the
quantity of alcohol absorbed.
C. It manifests itself at first by a general excitement, but very
soon the respiration and circulation are relaxed, and the temperature lowered.
D. Muscular power is weakened and extinguished ; always beginning at the extremities.
E. The insensibility gradually extends to the centers (as in dead
drunkenness) .
F. The heart is the last to die {ultimum moriens).
G. The time that elapses between the beginning of intoxication.
and death varies from forty-five minutes to three hours.
H. AVhen the dose is not sufficient to induce death the excitability
of the nervous system returns after a time, varying with circumstances.
T. The arterial blood remains bright, and preserves all its apparent qualities, nearly up to the moment of death.

58

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

J. Alcoholized blood contains, during life and after death, a great
number of free, fatty globules, visible to the naked eye.
K. The pathological alterations are : vivid inflammation of the
viucous membrane of the stomach; the accumulation of the blood in
the right chamber of the heart and the large veins ; congestion of
the meninges, and especially of the lungs.
L. All solids or liquids in union with alcohol are easily separated
by distillation, proportionately by the method of volumes.
M. Alcohol taken by the stomach enters into the liver, and the
substance of the brain ; if in the blood it is represented as 1.0 ; in
the brain it is 1.34, in the liver, 1.48.
,N. Diluted alcohol produces the same effect when inti'oduced by
injection into the veins as when introduced into the stomach, but
operates more rapidly. The animal succumbs in less than twenty
minutes.
O. Alcohol injected into the veins spreads to all the tissues, but
accumulates most largely in the brain; being in the liver 1.75, in
the cerebral matter, 3.
P. Death by alcoholic poisoning is due primarily to its special
action upon the nervous centers.
Q. After the injection of a small dose of brandy (25 grammes =
360 grains), the blood continues to manifest the presence of alcohol by chemical reaction for many hours.
R. We never found in either thehlood or tissues any of the derivatives ofalcohol.
S. Only in the stomach was found a trace of acetic acid, gener:ated from alcohol by the ferment of the gastric juice.
T. Alcohol is rejected from the vital economy by divers systems
of elimination — by the lungs, the skin and the kidneys.
U. These organs are found to eliminate alcohol after the ingestion of very small doses.
V. The elimination lasts many hours ; even after an ingestion
very moderate, the kidneys continue longest to reject it.
X. Aldehyde, introduced into the stomach, is readily found in the
blood.
y. The aldehyde is, in great part, eliminated, partly transformed
into acetic acid.
Z. Alcohol has the same action and produces the same effects
upon men and upon the lower animals.
If these propositions are true then alcohol is no food ; but
Anstie and Richardson and many others engaged in a long and
active discussion — ^the point of dispute being what became of
the part of the alcohol which was not proved to be eliminated.

ALCOHOL'S EXIT FROM

THE BODY.

59

Dr. Dupre then experimented and claimed to have shown
^' that the amount of alcohol eliminated per day does not increase
with the continuance of the use of alcohol ; therefore it must
be somehow destroyed in the system."
Dr. Sabbotin thereupon disproved Dr. Dupre's conclusion
and demonstrated that great quantities are excreted through the
lungs, skin and kidneys unchanged.
Dr. Anstie followed with his experiments, by which he
thought he had established the fact that alcohol was burned
up in the body, and that only a very small proportion escaped
combustion.
Dr. Pavy came to the same conclusion, found that 600 grains
of absolute alcohol could be consumed by an adult in a day,
that beyond a certain dosage it becomes a narcotic poison of
dangerous character in every respect.
Upon these contradictory views entertained by eminent and
honest men, and in giving his own opinions, than which none
are of greater authority, Dr. William Hargreaves in his most
valuable book, "Alcohol and Science," published in 1886,
observes :
The foregoing are some of the chief experiments and views
regarding the eliminatiou of alcohol from the body. Is the evidence
for or against the total elimination of alcohol strong enough for
us to decide that all is eliminated? or shall we conclude that only a
small portion is cast out unaltered, as alcohol? Though it must be
owned that there is still room for further investigation, yet it is very
probable that the greater portion passes out of the body unchanged.
The important points in the question are :— Does alcohol arrest oxidation, or does it undergo oxidation? Are the alcohols burned
in the body, and do they yield the same products of combustion —
carbonic acid and water — as when burned in a lamp, or are they
burned at all? The evidence, as we have seen, is conflicting. On
one side there is that of Percy, Lallemand, Perrin and Duroy, which
goes to prove that alcohol is laid up in the tissues until it is eliminated by the excretory organs. Then there are the experiments of
Thudicum, Dupre and Anstie, showing that although when the body
was supersaturated with it free alcohol passed off by the urinary
organs, j^et this bears but a small proportion to what ought to be
found if the whole was eliminated in the form of alcohol.
Each and all agree that it passes off by the urine in certain stages
of intoxication as alcohol, but as the whole is not accounted for by

60

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

their experiments they therefore beg the question by assuming that
the remainder is consumed by the system.
It must be admitted that great difficulties are in the way of the
performance of all the necessary experiments, yet it is clearly not
sufficient to collect the alcohol only for a short time and then infer
that it always passes off at the same rate ; nor to collect it merely
at one or two outlets when the presumption is that it must pass out
at all of them. Before concluding that because only a small part of
what is injected is collected as alcohol the remainder is consumed
in the system, We must know how much the body will hold and
how much can be held in combination with the water of the tissues,
as the blood alone contains about 790 parts of water in lOOO ; and
also how long a time must pass before a given quantity of alcohol
is actually removed from the tissues with the excretions.
From the well-known greed of alcohol for water there can be but
little or no doubt that a large quantity taken will become absorbed
with the water in the tissues, and hence remain within the system
long after the period when it ceases to be detected in the excretions
of the lungs, skin, kidneys, etc.
It is scarcely presumable that all the alcohol taken into the body
could be detected in the excretions, yet failing to detect it is made
the test of the value of alcohol as a food. As Dr. Parkes well said
in reply to Dr. Anstie : "Even if complete destruction within certain limits were quite clear, this fact alone would not guide us to the
dietetic use of alcohol. We have first to trace the effect of the destruction and learn whether it is for good or evil."
To claim because alcohol is not detected that it must be oxidized
in the body, is claiming more for the action of alcohol in the system
than for the action of other drugs. It is not reasonable or fair to
assume because it is not collected from the tissues and excretions
that it must be food. Its mode of destruction, if it be destroyed, is
not known, and there is no chemical law that will warrant the claim
that it must be food if it is not found in the excretions. We are
unable to conceive of the very high theoretical force value of the
600 or 800 grains of absolute alcohol tha.t Dr. Anstie says " millions of sober persons are taking daily."
He asks : "Why
does not this large development of wholly useless force within the
body produce some violent symptom of disturbance?"
While we do not believe in the "force value of the 600 or 800
grains of alcohol daily taken," we have no difficulty in perceiving
"some violent symptoms of disturbance."
These disturbances are seen everywhere among the users of alcohol, and the doctor need not search far to find them, as will be
shown hereafter when we notice the diseases produced by alcoholics.

THREE

PERTINENT

INQUIRIES.

61

Alcohol can give no force, as it cannot give nutrition in any form or
quantity- True, there appears to be an increase of temperature in
the first stage of alcoholic excitement ; but it is brief, and we may
justly apprehend it to be the effect of local irritation and paralysis
of the nerves, and not an augmentation of force ; for no sooner does
alcohol find its way into the organism and diffuse itself through the
fluids, than depression takes place, respiration is impeded, carbonic
acid is decreased, muscular power diminished, and the sensibility
and consciousness blunted.
If active combustion or oxidation of alcohol took place within
the body we should reasonably expect that the temperature would
be permanently increased ; but all will agree that the temperature
generally declines after the ingestion of alcohol. It is impossible
when the animal system is burning faster than is normal that it
should be colder than it is naturally.
A slight oxidation may occur when the blood, diluted with alcohol,
is carried by the circulating current to the lungs and exposed to the
air, for this will occur if diluted alcohol is left exposed to the air
out of the body. It is also possible that acid oxidation may take
place, as is demonstrated, by free acid sweating, and the acid secretions from the intestines after alcoholic intoxication, especially by
wine and malt liquors. This acid oxidation may perhaps mainly
proceed from the fermentation that sometimes occurs within the
stomach, caused by the drinking of wines and malt liquors that have
been imperfectly fermented.
Another fact opposed to the combustive theory of alcohol in the
body is this, that none of its derivatives are found in the system
unless they have been taken independent of or in addition to the
alcohol. Lallemand, Perrin and Duroy failed to discover any aldehyde except that which had been administered, when it was readily
detected. When we see ashes there is the evidence that something
has been burned ; as aldehyde, a derivative of alcohol, has not been
detected in the animal system, as an evidence that alcohol has been
decomposed, it is very clear that it does not undergo in the animal
the combustive process claimed for it.
The weight of evidence shows that it enters the animal system
alcohol and leaves it the same compound. It must also be borne in
mind that alcohol will accumulate in the brain, spinal cord and
nerves, as was shown by Dr. Hammond in his New York lecture ;
and it is also well known that it accumulates in the blood, liver and
other organs and tissues ; hence it is reasonable to expect that but
a small portion would escape with the excretions. And further, as
alcohol is found and extracted from the organs and tissues long after
its ingestion, it must be very evident that it had not undergone the

62

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

process of oxidation ; hence we must still doubt that it is decomposed in the animal body, or in any way serves to build up the tissues, or produce foi'ce."
Three great questions arise in considering the relation of
alcoliol to the human being and its effect upon life and health.
1 . Is alcohol a poison ? Is it a substance which is always
hurtful or useless when the body and mind are in health?
2. Is alcohol a food, or a substance which when taken, as
things admitted to be foods should be taken, nourishes the
body and sustains vitality ?
3. Is alcohol a medicine, or a substance which even if a
poison, is yet under abnormal and unhealthy conditions of the
human being, when administered in proper cases and in a
proper manner, curative or nourishino- in its effect and a support to vitality ?
There are those who insist that alcohol is a poison ; that it
is always actively hurtful, or negatively so, because always
useless or worse than useless to the human being in health.
There are those who insist that alcohol is a food, and never
hurtful in health except under conditions when other foods
would be so, and that only its abuse is bad as when bread or
milk are bad, because the body is surfeited, or for some other
reason does not require food.
There are those who insist that alcohol is always useless or
injurious both in health and disease ; being as a medicine, if
ever it be a medicine, positively dangerous, and never necessary, because equally or more efficient and safer remedies are
at hand.
There are those who hold that, whether poison or food in
health, that in disease alcohol, in a great number and variety
of cases, is an appropriate, often a necessary, in some, an indispensable remedy ; sometimes a medicine food — that is, a nutritious medicine.
The questions in the public mind are then, more briefly, the
following :
1. Is alcohol under all circumstances, both of health or disease, an injurious poison?
2 Is alcohol, in appropriate cases of health or disease, a
food?
3. Is alcohol, either as food or poison, a medicine?

POISON,

FOOD

OK

MEDICINE.

63^

There is some need that these terms be clearly miderstood
and defined before proceeding further. A poison is thus defined by Mr. Webster :
1. Any substance which, when introduced into the animal organism, iscapable of producing a morbid, noxious or deadly effect
upon it.
2. Anything infectious or malignant, as the poison of pestilential
diseases.
3. Hence that which taints or destroys moral purity or health.
Dr. Worcester defines the word thus :
Any substance which, if introduced into the animal economy,
disturbs, suspends or destroys some or all of the vital functions ;,
venom ; virus. 2. Anything infectious or malignant. It is a general term and may be deadly or otherwise, quick or slow in its
operation.
Venom is au active and malignant poison.
Dr. Dunglison says ;
Poison, a generic name for all substances which, when introduced into the animal economy, either by cutaneous absorption,
respiration or the digestive canal, act in a noxious manner on the
vital properties or the texture of organs.
"Noxious" is hurtful, harmful, baneful, pernicious, injurious,
destructive, unwholesome, insalul)rious.
A food is, according to Mr. Webster :
1. What is fed upon; that which goes to support life by being
received within and being assimilated by the organism of an animal
or plant ; nutriment, aliment ; especially is eaten by animals for
nourishment ; flesh or vegetables partaken of for the support of life ;
victuals ; provisions.
2. Anything that sustains, nourishes and augments.
Dr. Worcester defines food thus :
Animal or vegetable substances, eaten for nourishment; aliment;
provisions ; victuals ; viands ; diet ; regimen. Food is a general
term for whatever is eaten by man or beast. Diet and regimen denote particular modes of living— diet for sick persons ; regimen for
the preservation of health.
Dr. Dunglison says :

Food — Aliment: and again Aliment— Food. Any substance
which, if introduced into the system is capable of nourishing it and
repau'ing its losses.

'64

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

A medicine is defined thus by Mr. Webster :
1'. Any substance administered in the treatment of disease ;
remedial agents ; remedy ; physic.
2. That branch of science which relates to the prevention, cure
or alleviation of the diseases of the human body.
Worcester defines "medicine" as
1. A drug or other substance uaed as a remedy for disease ;
physic.
2. That branch of physic which relates to the healing of
disease.
Dunglison, in the Medical Dictionary, with happy brevity,
defines "medicine"
A science, the object of which is the cure of disease and the
preservation of health.
Occasionally it is used to comprehend all branches of the healing art — at others to compromise one great division in contradistinction to surgery and obstetrics. Medicine in this sense
includes many branches : the chief of which are anatomy, physiology,
pathology, therapeutics, hygiene, materia medica and pharmacy.
These definitions make it clear tliat " Poison " is never
useful to healtli — it is the exact opposite in its influence, and
can never be used to preserve or restore health except to combat disease in the way that two murderers, each attempting
to destroy an innocent man, might, like mad dogs, be set upon
each other, and thus preserve tlie life of their victim by taking their own. Food is never hurtful to health except by
being taken when there is no necessity for it. Medicine is
only useful in disease, and is itself poisonous to health,
although as a preventive and restorative even a poison may
be a medicine — at least in the generally accepted belief — which
I do not assaiL Upon all these questions the advocates of
alcohol must establish the affirmative. True, it may be said
that a fiivorable presumption arises from the fact of use, but
this cannot be the case since it is already seen that great evils
are the result of that use, w^ith no corresponding, if any good
whatever, unless it may be in medicine and surger3^ In this
inquiry we will not stand upon trifles as to the order of proof,
but in a case like this there must be a clear and unanswerable
demonstration of benefits to ofiset the clear and unanswer-

PHYSIOLOGICAL

MATTERS.

65

able, or at least unanswered, demonstration of enormous evil
and injury before society can be justified in longer permitting
so questionable and dangerous an enemy to be at large.
Whoever attempts to arrrange the facts, experiments, arguments, authoritative opinions and great mass of general
-evidence which exist, bearing upon the questions I have stated,
will find it impossible, without protracted labor, to analyze and
classify the material which is at hand, so as to preserve, at all
times, the unmixed logical identity of each topic and what is
specially relevant to it. It is in fact quite unnecessary. All
these questions turn upon another which includes them and is
the entire issue. Is alcohol on the whole a good to man which
should be recognized, and, if need be, protected by law?
Therefore, having endeavored to clearly indicate the points to
be considered in this examination of the physiological part of
our subject, so that, these being kept in mind, the reader can
analyze and apply the evidence for himself, I will endeavor to
state some — it is impossible to give all — ^for the world would
not contain the books, then to be written — of the facts and
testimony upon which the issue must be decided ; but without
careful topical arrangement which would involve much repetition and useless sacrifice of time and space.
I cannot hope in this work to fully satisfy the desire of the
professional, or even the general reader. I shall deem myself
happy, if enough be written to arouse the mind to still further
investigation of a subject, which, in spite of all opposition, will
be thoroughly investigated by the human race, as one of prime
importance to its interests, both in this world and in that which
is to come.
I proceed, then, with the evidence, which I propose to cite
as I come to it, very much as a witness tells his story on the
stand.
Physiology is the science of the functions of living bodies.
A function is a power or faculty by the exercise of which vital
phenomena are produced. The "tripod," or three great
branches of animal physiology, are the sanguineous system,
the function of which is to circulate the blood ; the nervous
system, the function of which is to convey sensation, volition
or vital influence to and from the brain ; the muscular system,
the function of which is to move things, and is either voluntary,
5

66

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

dependent upon the independent action of the will ; or involuntary, going on of itself for the preservation of life.
By this expression, "physiological action of alcohol," upon
which scientific investigators place so great stress, is meant
the action or effect of alcohol while in the body upon these
functions, or the power to do and the doing of these great systems, and of all other organs of the body ; and, as the mental
and moral being are inseparable from it while the body lives,
so is included in the expression the action of alcohol upon the
whole nature of man.
I believe it to be conceded that the most important, decisive
and authoritative experiments and observations upon the physiological action of alcohol have been made by Dr. B. W. Richardson, and I have already cited largely from his accounts of them.
I will in this connection add only this further from him with
which he concludes his summary of the bad effect of alcohol
upon the system :
It will be asked, Was there no evidence of any good service
rendered by the agent in the midst of so much obvious bad service?
I answer to that question that there was no such evidence whatever,
and there is none.
Dr. Parkes and Count Wallowicz made experiments for a
long time upon a strong, healthy and intelligent soldier, a
most vigorous and suitable subject for the solution of difficulties and for a demonstration of the action of alcohol. A very
full account of their work is to be found in Proceedings of the
Royal Society, XVIII., 1870. They sum up the result as follows :
.... We were hardly prepared for the ease with which the appetite may be destroyed, the heart unduly excited and the capillary
circulation improperly increased. Considering its daily and almost
universal use, there is no agent which seems to us to require more
caution and more skill to obtain the good and to avoid the evil which
its use entails.
Experiments upon animals have this advantage, that there
is no hesitation to administer the agent in quantities sufficient
to determine any point, regardless of the effect upon the subject; while constant care has to be exercised with this dangerous article lest permanent injury or death be the consequence in
the case of man.
At the same time it has been demonstrated

A LIST

OF

EESULTS.

67

that the deductions drawn in the former are as reliable as in
the latter case.
The celebrated Dr. W. A. Hammond made careful and
extensive experiments "for the purpose of arriving at conclusions as nearly exact as possible relative to the direct ejffect
of alcohol upon the nervous system." A full account of them
is to be found in "Neurological Contributions," Vol. 1, No. 2,
Putnam & Sons, 1880.
Dr. Hammond gave a dog three ounces of alcohol diluted
with the same amount of water. The dog retired at once to*
a corner and lay down ; in forty-eight seconds alcohol
appeared in his expired breath ; in five minutes he walked
with reluctance ; in eight, with difficulty ; in fourteen, could
not move — paralysis ; respiration was hurried, heart greatly
accelerated ; pupils of the eye at first contracted ; in fifteen
minutes dilated; in thirty minutes, profound sleep — coma;
sensibility of the cornea destroyed, the limbs in a state
of complete resolution, etc. ; temperature fallen from 101°
F., which it was before ingestion of the alcohol, to 98.50 —
remained in comatose condition and died in one hour and
twenty-two minutes after taking the alcohol.
Dr. Hammond gives us the following rather non-attractive
list "of diseases and disorders of the nervous system produced
by the excessive use of alcohol," made up, he observes, "from
my note-books,
based on cases occurring in my private and hospital practice : "
OF

THE

BRAIN.

Cerebral congestion.
Cerebral hemorrhage, with its consequences — apoplexy and
paralysis.
Meningeal hemorrhage.
Cerebral thrombosis.
Softening of the brain.
Aphasia.
Acute cerebral meningitis.
Chronic cerebral meningitis.
Abscess of the brain.
Multiple cerebral sclerosis, one of those diseases of which tremor
is a characteristic symptom.
Every variety of insanity, including general paralysis.

68

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

OF

CORD,

THE

SPINAL

Spinal congestion.
Antei'o-cateral spinal sclerosis.
Posterior spinal sclerosis (locomotor ataxia).
Epilepsy.
Chorea.
Multiple cerebro'spinal sclerosis, another one of these affections
characterized by tremor. Athetosis : A remarkable disease, which
I was the first to describe, and which is now well recognized both
in this country and in Europe. The case on which my description
was based was one in which the patient was in the habit of drinking sixty glasses of gin daily.
OF

THE

NERVES.

Anaesthesia.
Paralysis agitans.
Neuralgia in all situations.
Neuritis.
Neuro-sclerosis.
"Neuro-sclerosis, or hardening, is doubtless the result of the
direct action of alcohol on the nervous tissue." He also adds :
"Alcohol probably predisposes to various other diseases' in
which no direct relation can be traced ;" " descendants of persons addicted to the excessive use of alcohol are liable to various diseases of the nervous system and there is some evidence
to show that offspring generated during a fit of intoxication of
either parent are often born idiotic."
Dr. Hammond enumerates various conditions of exhaustion
and abnormity in which the use of alcohol may be beneficially
indulged in provided there be full power of restraint. It is
in fact as it seems to me, after careful reading of all he says
upon the subject, really a medicinal use for which he contends.
I think, in consenting that the individual may safely, as a rule,
exercise his own volition, in the moderate and reasonable use
as a remedy for these abnormal conditions in which some men
often find themselves, he overlooks the fiict, that, generally,
they are without professional knowledge of themselves, and
therefore not qualified, like one who can discourse as he does
upon the .subject, in effect "to doctor themselves, " with its
unadvised administration.
I feel the more certain of the justice of these observations

IS IT

A POISON.

69

from the fact that the remarks of Dr. Hammond, which have
been used as the source of some aid and comfort to tlie advocates of free personal indulgence in strong drink, were made
some years since, and, as I said, I do not think, even as they
are, it is less than a perversion to cite the authority of his great
name favorably to anything but a really medicinal use, although
he does not think it always necessary to require the administration to be under the direction of a physician. In this many
strong total al)stainers will agree with him when they grant
that alcohol may properly sometimes be used as a medicine.
A sick man, or one in an abnormal slate which has become
chronic, may come to know precisely Avhat his medical adviser
would prescribe and so " confess himself and save his shilling."
I think it would be as well for the patient, and better for the
profession if all learned })hysicians held less to the doctrine of
"free will ;' but this really is not the realm of professional
opinion, and is the main question under discussion, which it
is for society at large to decide. I feel the more surely that
I am right in this parenthetical attempt to save the influence of
this great name to the cause of true temperance by rebuking
the use which some have attempted to make of it, by reason
of the following letter, written in kind response to one from
myself asking for information ;
43 West 54tli Street,
New York, July loth, 1887.
Dear Sir : As the best answer to your letter of June 2oth that
I can make, I send you a Journal eoutaining a mouograph of mine
on the effects of alcohol in the human system.
I think you will find in that all the information you desire. As
you will perceive, there are circumstances iu which in my opinion
alcohol is useful to the human system. But 1 am free to say thatf
weicjhing all the points for and against, manldnd laov.ld be better mentally, morally and 2JiiysicalJy, if its use luere altogether abolished.
Yours sincerely,
Hon. H. W. Blair.

"William A. Hammoitd.

That last sentence is worth volumes of this poor work of
mine. Let it be our business to see that mankind comprehends
its solemn truth. Then the use of alcohol will be "altogether
abolished," not merely its manufacture and sale, but even its
personal use, because the safety of the people is the supreme
law.

70

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Dr. Hargreaves, after compiling and considering all the evidence upon the subject, says of the action of alcohol upon the
vital organs : "Alcohol unnaturally excites the heart and respirationdisturbs
,
the regularity of nervous action ; increases
and decreases the functions of digestion according to the degree of its application ; lowers the temperature and inj ures the
body in many ways without presenting evidence of a single
beneficial service ; but is evil always, and that continually."
That alcohol is a poison would seem to be recognized universally since it is synonymous with the expression " intoxicating
liquor." Toxicology is the science of poisons. The word
comes from the Greek word, which signifies bow or arrow —
the barbarians poisoned their arrows, and the word came
among the Latins to signify poison — and our word "intoxicant "is a substance which poisons. Alcohol is the universal
intoxicant or poison. A moment's thought will show any one
that, if we except tobacco, probably at least nine-tenths of all
the poisoning done to civilized nations is by the agency of alcohol, and a large proportion of the poisoning suffered by the
race. Sometimes in destroying it acts quickly, killing at
once ; in other cases it may be years before completing the
process — but it should never be forgotten that intoxication
and poisoning are the same thing.
Prof. Christison classifies alcohol among narcotic acrid poisons. Prof. Keuben D. Mussey, M. D., one of the most distinguished medical men of his time, and Professor of Anatomy
and Surgery, Dartmouth College, President of the New Hampshire Medical Society, Fellow of American Academy of Sciences, etc., etc., as long ago as 1835, of this class of poisons
said:
"If it goes into the blood it is thrown off" as soon as the system
can accomplish its deliverance, if it has not been too far enfeebled by the influence of the poison." He further observes in
his prize essay, one of the most scientific and powerful presentations of the subject ever made : "So long as alcohol retains
a place among sick patients so long there will be drunkards ;
and who would undertake to estimate the amount of responsibility assumed by that physician Avho prescribes to the enfeebled dyspeptic patient the daily internal use of spirit while he
knows that this simple prescription may ultimately ruin his

SOME

STRANGE

CASES.

71

health, make him a vagabond, shorten his life, and cut him off
from the hope of heaven." Speaking of ardent spirits, he
says : "Time was when it was only used as a medicine, and who
will dare to offer a guaranty that it shall not again overspread
the world with disease and death." He continues : "Ardent
spirit — already under sentence of public condemnation, and
with the prospect of undergoing an entire exclusion from the
social circle and the domestic fireside — still lingers in the sick
chamber, the companion and pretended friend of its suffering
inmates. It rests with medical men to say how long the unalterable, unrelenting foe of the human race shall remain secure
in this sacred but usurped retreat. They have the power, and
theirs is the duty to perform the mighty exorcism. Let the
united effort soon be made, and the fiend l)e thrust forth from
this strong but unnatural alliance and companionship with men,
and cast into that 'outer darkness' which lies beyond the precincts of human sufiering and human enjoyment."
Dr. Chad wick in his Essay on Alcohol says that alcohol may
kill in a few minutes, and it may be taken in quantities sufficient to cause death Avithout producing its effects immediately
by being absorbed in the blood, etc.
Prof. Pereria says: "The local effects of alcohol or rectified spirits are those of a powerful irritant and caustic poison."
Sir Astley Cooper says: "I never suffer ardent spirits in
my house, thinking them evil spirits."
Dr. Ure says in his Medical Dictionary, "Aqua Vitre —
water of life — the name absurdly given to alcohol, intoxicating,
beverages. "It has been the aqua mortis, the water of death,
to myriads of the human race ; and will probably ere long
destroy the native tribes of North America and Australia."
Dr. Percy gave a full grown dog 2.5 ounces of alcohol.
The dog did not even gasp, but with a "loud, plaintive cry"
died. " Never did I see every spark of vitality more effectually
and instantaneously extinguished." "Death in this case was
precisely like that of poisoning by prussic acid."
Fontane says that leeches die in two or three minutes when
wet with alcohol ; injected through the skin — direct to the
blood — a frog died in one minute ; it kills turtles and paralyzes fishes, the water containing but a small portion of alcohol.

72

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Innumerable experiments and observations for hundreds of
years have taught the professional world the fatal qualities of
alcohol.
On man, the effect of large doses of alcohol are the same as
on animals. A man having stolen a bottle of whisky, thought
to get the good of it and yet conceal his crime, drank the
whole and died in four hours. A boy drank secretly from
his father's bottle. His silence attracted the attention of the
father, who called him l)y name ; but he was insensible, and in
less than an hour, dead.
P. De Marmon, M. D., of Kings Bridge, N. Y., read a
paper to the N. Y. MedicalJournal Association, Feb. 18, 1870,
in which he said : " Within a year I have seen three cases of
poisoning by alcohol in children" — two of them died. He
then describes the children, their symptoms, etc., which I
abbreviate. One, a boy, who was five years old, strong, healthy
child of Irish parents, drank tumbler full of whisky Sunday
morning, died in 19 hours. "Sarah F., a little girl," strong
and healthy, of sober Irish parents, tumbler full of whisky
given her by a boy who was fifteen years old. Was about to
die, but active medical treatment producing heavy vomiting,
saved her.
The third case: "Robert X., a boy eight years
old,
father and mother both regular inebriates," and
both drunk at the time ; boy took whisky at eight o'clock Friday morning and dead in twenty-one hours. In this case an
autopsy thirty-one hours after death showed the body thin,
icteric ; rigor mortis well marked in the lower limbs, but none
in the arms nor in the neck ; the head rolling about as if it had
been dislocated in its cervical articulation. The lungs were
thoroughly congested, and of a dark-blue color, and contained
a large quantity of black blood, which could be pressed out,
as if from a sponge, after cutting through the texture of the
organ. The internal membrane of the bronchus was livid and
coated with bloody, spumous mucosities ; the pericardium contained about half an ounce of serum. The right ventricle of
the heart was much distended with dark blood and had black
clots ; the left ventricle was empty ; the blood had a smell of
whisky. The liver was congested, of a pale yellowish color,
and the gall bladder less than half full. The above are not
isolated cases.
Our daily and weekly papers frequently relate

THE LIVER

°3.

HEESYAND
CANCEROUS
DEGENERATION.

-A
CANCEROUS
TUBERCLES.

B

CONSIDEEED

AS

FOOD.

73

similar occurrences, all over our country ; indeed tbey have
become so common that they fail to call forth any comment.
In the year 1868, in the Northern Hospital, Liverpool, England, alone, there were thirty-six cases of acute alcohol poisoning, which generally resulted "from the practice of sucking
new rum from casks at the docks ; and not unfrequently very
young boj's are subjects of it."
There seems to be among many an idea that a thing which
is a poison in a large dose may be a food — that is a nourisher
of growth and sup^jort of health — in a small one. One can conceive how an overplus of nourishment may do injury, as too
much water may drown the wheel, by creating a mechanical
obstruction of the organs in the discharge of their functions,
or imposing upon them a task be^^ond their strength, or again
by introducing into the body a larger or smaller proportion of
any given chemical element some of which is required by
nature in the healtliy frame. But all such substances are the
result of a life process and not of decay, and in no instance
do they attack the structure of the organs or the other life
and health-giving substances with which they come in contact
in the body ; while alcohol is known to make war upon every
other healthy substance, structure and function of the body.
It creates nothing. It is a destroyer. War may sometimes
be a blessing. But it is a blessing only because we are suffering from or threatened by a still greater curse. Opposing
forces, either of which might draw us from the straight and narrow path, along Avhich we must move to physical as well as spiritual life, and precipitate us into the fatal abyss which yawns on
the one or the other hand, may counteract each other, and the
resultant motion may be along the line of health and happiness.
So a blister which burns and inflames, because it is a poison,
may cure the inflammation within. One poison may counteract
the effect of another — these are medicinal effects. But who
can conceive that arsenic, or strychnine, or prussic acid is a
food ; yet each one of them, under certain abnormal conditions
of the body, is a preventive of disease and in others a cure.
There is no evidence that any living creature in health ever desired alcohol ; that to smell or taste it was attractive ; that in
the extremest hunger or thirst unperverted nature did not
revolt from it ; and in fact the more faint and exhausted the.

74

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

system the greater danger from its administration, because the
rao-e of alcohol for the water in the system, leads to its more
rapid distribution throughout the system, when the stomach has
been long empty of food. Then, if ever, alcohol must be administered with extreme care, and if it relieve faintness and restore
the tone of the system for the moment its action is not a
nourishing, which is the office of food, but the cold prick of
steel in the side of jaded nature, which will faint all the sooner
for the stimulus, unless in some other form the real bread and
water of life are furnished to revive the dying powers.
Says Dr. Hargreaves :
Alcohol, the essential ingredient in all liquids, having undergone
vinous fermentation, has, by the universal judgment and consent
of toxicologists, been classed, as already seen, as a poison when
taken in large doses. Yet there are those who seem to be unable
to distinguish between a poison and a food. Poisoning, it is true,
may differ in degree according to the strength of the poison, or the
power of the organism to resist its toxical effects. If no substances
■except those which produce immediately fatal effects were classed
as poisons, the number would be very limited.
It appears very illogical to suppose that a substance, which if
given in large doses will destroy life, becomes a food when taken in
smaller quantities. Two pounds of good bread or beef are no
more a poison than two drachms, while one-sixtieth of a grain of
strychnia is as much a poison in its nature as any other quantity.
If alcohol is a poison, it cannot, by any straining of logic, be a
food. If it is food, it cannot be a poison. A poison is any substance " that disconcerts and disturbs life's healthy movements,"
and " is not capable of being converted into, or becoming a part of,
the living organism."
Prof. Dalton says, "Under the term food are included all those
substances, solid and liquid, which are necessary to sustain the
process of nutrition." The first act of this process is the absorption from without of those materials which enter into the composition of the living frame, or of others that may be converted into
them in the interior of the body. Which of these definitions corresponds to the nature and effects of alcohol ? Are not its nature
and effects that of a poison? The action of alcohol, after it enters
into the blood-current, is a question that has long, and is still, as
already seen, agitating the scientific world.
The Liebigian doctrine, that though alcohol is not a tissue-forming substance, but a calorific agent, has had many supporters, who

VARIOUS

NUTRIMENTS

COMPARED.

75

maintained its value as a respiratory or heat-generating food,
though no proof of any kind was presented by Liebig that alcohol
was eliminated from the blood by a process of combustion. This
doctrine had a long reign, and much was written and said about
carbon, and the respirator}' and heat-giving power of alcohol, without any facts to show that it was burnt up, or decomposed within
the body. Professor Moleschott advanced the doctrine that, if
alcohol was not food itself, it made food last longer. Afterwards
it was discovered that alcohol destroyed molecular life by narcotizing it, and that when there was less life there was less waste, and
consequently less need for food. This error, like every other, died
amid its worshippers.
But that the food doctrine might not yet die, Dr. Anstie steps in
with another theory ; laboring earnestly to prove in his book on
"Stimulants and Narcotics" that alcohol in certain doses is a
stimulant and tonic, and not a poison ; and by attaching other definitions to words endeavored to prove that food is medicine, and medicine food ; and that alcohol is both food and medicine : as by his
theory stimulants are tonics, and tonics stimulants, and as food
was both stimulant and tonic, and alcohol being both a stimulant
and a tonic, it must therefore be food. Dr. Anstie says (page 714),
*' one of the most deadly poisons is in small doses an excellent
tonic, namely, arsenic. Hence there seems to be a radical difference, and not one of degree, between the effects of large and small
doses of alcohol." If arsenic is a tonic, why not use it, as well as
alcohol, in small doses ? AVhy not call it a food? Again he says
(page 715) — "The very fact that the ' poison-line' of alcohol can
be shifted by an alteration in the state of the bodily health is, to my
mind, one of the strongest confirmations of the theory that there
is a radical distinction between the effect of large and small doses.
So long as there is any need for alcohol in the system, it will fail to
intoxicate."
This might be applicable to the taking of a beefsteak, when the
stomach was not in a condition to digest it. But, as regards the
need of the system for alcohol preventing it from intoxicating, we
fail to see the force of the argument. The doctor admits that in
certain doses alcohol is a narcotic.
Every mother who has ever given her child a narcotic knows
that, if it is repeated often, the dose must be increased to produce
its desired effect. It has been said that alcohol lessens the vital
powers by narcotizing the system, and hence that the system
requires an increased dose of the narcotic to arouse the sensibilities
blunted by the use of the poison, and not that the increased or
repeated dose is required by the needs of the organism.
True to

76

THE

TEMPEKANCE

MOVEMENT.

the theory of supposing that the Craving or needs of the system will'
prevent alcoholics from intoxicating or injuring the system, the
following very aptly applies :
"The nervous system, the very center and basis of the vital
functions, has been drained of blood and exhausted of force, and
unless it be quickly restored to its wonted activity life must cease."
Now, wuen " the vital functions have been drained of blood," etc.,
it would be the act of common sense to administer to the systemsome of the blood-making substances to increase the force ; but
instead of which Dr. Anstie says : " Under these circumstances, the
rapid absorption of a substance, which, like alcohol, has a special
proclivity towards the nervous system, is precisely the best means
of reviving the failing circulation in the nervous centers, and upholding the powers of life (i. e., keeping the machinery going) until the
body can be supplied with its ordinary nutriment in sufficient quantity
to restore the condition of healthy nutrition."
Here the doctor admits that alcohol will only keep the machinery
going until it can be supplied with ordinary nutriment. Now, if it
is food and nutriment, why not continue its use instead of the
" ordinary nutriment " ?
If it will not supply the place of ordinary nutriment, how can it
have any claim to be food? If the "vital functions have been
drained of blood and exhausted gt force," why lose time by waiting
for alcohol to keep the machinery going? "Why not give the proper
nutriment at once, in the form of beef tea, milk, etc., instead of
alcohol, which gives no force, but will use up some of the little force
still remaining in its efforts to eliminate it from the system?
Dr. Richardson says: "They themselves (alcohols) supply na
force at any time, but cause expenditure of force, by which means,
they get out of the body, and therewith lead to exhaustion and
paralysis of motion.
The animal force which should be
expended on the nutrition and sensation of the body is in part
expended on the alcohol, an entire foreign expenditure."
Dr. Anstie says : "If it be well understood that a glass of good
wine will relieve a man's depression and fatigue sufficiently to enable
him to digest his dinner, and that a pint of gin taken at once will
probably kill him stone-dead, why haggle about words? On the
part of the medical profession, I think I may say that we have long
since begun to believe that those medicines which really do benefit
our patients act in one way or another as foods, and that some of
the most decidedly poisonous substances, are those which offer, in the
form of small doses, the strongest example of a true food action. On
•the part of alcohol, then, I venture to claim that, though we all
acknowledge it to be a poison, if taken during health, in any but quite

NUTRITION

AND

ALCOHOL.

77

restricted doses, it is also a valuable medicine food. I am obliged
to declare that the chemical evidence is as yet insufficient to give
any complete explanation of its exact manner of acting upon the
system ; but that the facts are as striking as they could well be,
and that there can be no mistake about them."
Here we are told that medicine of value is food, and food is
medicine, and alcohol must be somehow food ; yet he frankly confesses a very important fact, that he is not able to tell us how
alcohols act on the system. Have we arrived at the last quarter of
the nineteenth century, with the experiments of English, French
and German investigators before us, and still are ignorant of the
action of food? If not, how can alcohol be food? But let us
examine the food power of alcohol.
Dr. Hargreaves then proceeds with a masterly discussion of
more than one hundred pages to demonstrate by fact, argument and authority that alcohol has no food value nor power
to support vitality. I can do little more than refer the reader
to his great book, from Avhich I have already so often quoted.
But it may be best to attempt a condensed statement of what
he has so well done at large.
He says on the sul)ject of nutrition and alcohol :
Every substance capable of nourishing the human system, and
entitled to the name of food, consists either of starch, sugar, oil,
albuminous or glutinous matter, whether derived from the animal
or vegetable kingdom.
The blood is the bearer of nutriment to the tissues of the body
to replace the waste arising from the disintegration that is constantly
taking place in the organism.
Nutriment furnished by the food is, by the various processes of
digestion, assimilation, etc., gradually converted into blood, from
which the tissues extract their own proper pabulum.
But food has another office to fulfill. It is necessary to health,
nay, to life itself, that the temperature of the body be maintained
at a given point, which point is the same, with little variation, by
day or night, when active or at rest, at all seasons of the year, and
in all climates.
This heat is generated in the body itself, the materials for its
maintenance being found in the blood, partly from combination of
the oxygen inspired by the lungs with certain elements of disintegration, but chiefly, in climates like this, by its combination with certain elements of our food.
Every substance capable of being

78

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

employed as food subserves at least one of these processes — the
formation of tissue, or the production of heat.
Thus food has a double office to fulfill — namely, to furnish the
blood with the materials for repairing the waste of the tissues and
its fluid secretions, and with the materials for carrying on this internal combustion, the fuel for his ever-burning fire.
Dr. James Edmunds, who has hardly a superior as an
authority upon all that relates to alcohol, in a lecture in New
York city, Sept. 17, 1874, defining the term "food," said:
I would say that a food is that which, being innocent in relation,
to the tissues of the body, is a digestible or absorbable substance,
that can be oxidized in the body, and decomposed in such a way
as to give up to the bod}' the forces which it contains." This definition of a food is clear, concise, logical and based upon the physiological and chemical action of a true food ; or in the words of the
doctor, " brings food in relation to the body into a perfect parallel
with fuel in relation to a steam-engine." There is no doubt that
that is philosophically correct in the last degree.
Keeping this definition in view, as its correctness cannot be
doubted, let us endeavor to ascertain if alcohol be a food. Dr.
Gordon said : " It would be difficult to find a more destructive
poison than ardent spirits " — dilute alcohol. "We may recall the
experiment of Dr. Percy who injected two ounces and a half of
alcohol into the stomach of a dog, when immediately the animal
uttered a loud, plaintive cry, and fell dead at his feet. " Never,"
says Dr. Percy, " did I see every spark of vitality more instantaneously extinguished."
The action of alcohol in this case produced death precisely as.
would a large dose of prussic acid. Is alcohol innocent in relation
to the tissue ? Is it not destructive to life ? Would two ounces or
even two pounds of the most concentrated food have killed the dog?
Those who advocate the use of alcohol as a food will at
least be willing to join in the general "smile" which must
arise on the faces of all who have any sense of the ludicrous
at the thought of this species of food. It will be remembered that alcohol is derived from the decomposition of sugar,
also that one half at least of the sugar is by the process turned
into carbonic acid gas, Avhich is a poisonous gas, capable of
destroying life. The remainder is of course not sugar, and
the great preponderance of evidence is that none of it is food,
but even if it were the economical idea has vanished.
It does

COMPARED

WITH

A LOAF OF BREAD.

79

not follow that, because liquors are made of sugar as found
in apples, wheat, barley and grapes, that the alcoholic product
is good. The process of making is one of putrefaction, and
there is a presumption that the result being no form of life, is
in some fashion death — but chemical annalysis has settled thefood value question.
A barrel of beer, thirty-one gallons, is made from about
two and one half bushels of barley. Very nutritious beer
then would that be in which were to be found the food remains
of 156 pounds, or three bushels. Then there will be 5.2
pounds used in making a gallon, that is 83.2 ounces of^barley
to a gallon. It is found that in the process of malting there
is lost 20 ounces ; mashing, 27.4 ounces ; fermenting, 13.4 ; in
"fining," 9 ounces ; in all, 70 ounces ; and the remaining "food,"
consisting of 13.2 ounces, is principally a gum which has little,
if any, nutriment in it, and in cash value as nourishment the
three bushels of barley, or of any given quantity of barley, even
if this remainder were as nutritious in proportion as the barley
was originally, less than one sixth remains. In other words,
in order to obtain the nourishment that is in the three bushels
of barley, it will be necessary to drink six barrels, or 186
gallons, of beer. Consumed by the glass, at ten cents per
glass, and allowing two drinks to a pint, and ten cents a drink,
the three l)ushels of barley cost $297.60, in round numbers
$300. The average American laborer would thus be able, by
diligence and economy, to earn enough to buy just about
three bushels of barley a year. If five cents a glass is enough,
then he can buy his three bushels of barley in six months. If
the barley is worth $1.00 per bushel, he is earning two cents
per diem — about one fiftieth his wages in money at $1.00 per
day — the average number of working days an industrious
man is employed not being over 300 in a year. If the beer
costs ten cents a glass, then he earns in food consumed in the
form of beer, exactly one cent a day. I suspect that it costs
more than ten cents per glass, time, frolic and sometimes
debauch considered. Baron Liebig himself ridicules this foodvalue nonsense. He says: "If a man drinks daily eight or
ten quarts of the best Bavarian beer (equal to our lager beer),
in the course of twelve months he will have taken into hissystem the nutritive constituents contained in a five-pound

80

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

loaf of bread." So that the father of the food theory himself
justifies the use of malt liquors because they contain food,
when it will require a man to consume daily a pailful for a
a year in order to obtain ten cents worth of food. Few men
can think of drinking more than three quarts per diem and
accomplish much else. It would then require three years
time to drink up the nourishment in the five-pound loaf of
bread. The man would not obtain a crumb to a meal, and
would actually consume less than a hearty canary bird, or
even the common red ant which invades his sugar bowl.
If it bo said that he gets the water also — certainly, but
he can have that in far better state for nothing, and it will
relieve and not increase his thirst besides. If it be said that
he feels the better and stronger — ^that again is a delusion and
a snare. He is weaker, and his sottish joy is inferior to that
of healthy animal life — of the sober "beasts that perish."
The following table shows the chemical composition of the
principal liquors. The extract indicates all that can possibly
be claimed to be food :
Name.

Alcohul,
Extract,
Water,
Tot a J

Whisky

Number of ounces
Beer
Porter
Ale
Wine
iu a pint of beer.
per cent. per cent. per cent. per cent. per cent.

28 to 55 14 to 23

3.00
6.09
.21

72 to 45 86 to 7G

90.70
100.00

5.85
5.00
.15
89.00

4.00
5.66
.17
90.17

100.00

100.00

11 ounces.
13
16

ounces.
ounces.

Liebig says : "Beer, wine and spirits furnish no element
capable of entering into the composition of the blood, muscular fiber, or any part which is the vital principle." Dr.
Grindrod says: "A copious London beer drinker is all one
vital part ; he wears his heart on his sleeve, bare to a death
wound from the claw of a cat or a rusty nail. Every medical
man in London dreads a beer drinker for a patient in a surcase."
Dr. gical
Edmunds
declares that the diseases of beer drinkers are
alwa3^s of a dangerous character, and that such persons can
never undergo the most trifling operation with the security of
the temperate." Dr. Thomas Sewell, Columbia College,
Washington, D. C, says "That alcohol is a poison ever at
war with man's nature .... and finally produces scirrhous

BTA®?AS5S OF THE STOMACTi !.V'\:mi€)r'S COTBmONS

After a Ioti:^ Deba
^. ucli .

Ulcerous.

-/

'"^"

J"'^

^^^^

I

B|

^HH

^Kj

m

BR?

^miM■

^Hmci

^^^^"

\
^

W
,

y

Death byD el Lnum
Tremens.
MH
^

^'

»**•

AWAKENING

OLD

APPETITES

81

cancer of the stomach and other organic affections. No one
who indulges habitually in the use of alcoholics, whether in
the form of wine or more ardent spirits, possesses a healthystomach."
Think of that — the habitual use of a food destroying the
very organ provided by nature to welcome it and appropriate it
to the system — and then also destroying the system itself. It
would be better to live on some milder and more nutritious
poison.
The serious side of this proposed substitution of beer, etc.,
for distilled drinks, both for food and reformation, is vividly
and powerfully set forth by Dr. J. M. Buckley in the Christian Advocate of July 7, 1887. Dr. Buckley's tract on this
subject should be carefully read by everyone, for the increasing use of beer is worse than all the plagues of Egypt. We
may yet in good earnest be urging the people to go back to
brandy, whisky, gin and rum as a means of reforming them
from this sodden, drooling, half-witted style of drunkenness
which substitutes a stupid, boozy mass for the old-fashioned
few, wide-awake with delirium tremens, a disease which was
characterized by a certain fatal liveliness and dispatch far preferable to the wheezy and idiotic stupors of the beer guzzlers.
Dr. Buckley says :
Great has been the increase in the use of malt liquors in the
United States during the past twenty-five years. Instead of diminishing intemperance, as some claim, the drinking usages of society
have greatly increased. It was maintained when lager beer was
first introduced into this country that its general use would diminish
intemperance, but side by side with its growing use that of spirituous
liquors has also increased.
Our climate is more stimulating than that of Germany, and our
beer is stronger
Many have used malt liquors — and to
excess — who before they became common had never used intoxicating liquors of any kind
those who would never have
touched whisky, brandy or gin, and who even shrank from the use
of wine, have taken to beer drinking.
This, too, has been a constant
stumbling block for the partially reformed
Thus men and
boys who would hesitate to enter upon a course of general liquor
drinking have begun with beer
Many nursing mothers
have been led to drink malt liquors under the delusion that it was
beneficial to them and not hurtful to their infants. Thus the article
6

82

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

has been introduced into the home and become a common drink, and
the whole character of many families changed.
By the use of beer hereditary appetites, long dormant, have been
awakened. A young man, whose grandfather died a drunkard, but
whose father was a rigid abstainer, when led to drink a glass of
beer, plunged immediately, to the amazement of all his friends, into a
wild debauch.
He had previously resisted many temptations to
touch wines or brand}'
Grocers and their clerks, keeping
malt liquors, have become demoralized, in many instances taken to
drinking and in most, so far as we can ascertain, have finally added
spirituous liquors to their stock
In addition to all this the
influence of every user of malt liquors, as a luxury or as a beverage,
has either been against total abstinence or it has been sufficient to
paralyze any efforts that have been made
The beer drinker
expostulating with the wine drinker has nothing to say
Lovers of strong liquors will not leave them to come back to malt
liquors
Alcohol has a thirst-producing power, and every
article that contains alcohol has it. How can men drink ten, twenty,
thirty, or, as has been testified in court, fifty glasses a day, if beer
does not produce thirst? It is not so with water or milk. ....
With a considerable acquaintance with reformed persons, we have
yet to find one who was brought back from gin, whisky or brandy
by the substitution of beer.
There is a common impression that alcohol creates heat or
the power to resist cold ; but this is the result of a deception
of the senses. We are not always as we feel for the moment,
and a rush of the circulation to the surface, unless there is a
creative ratlier than a mere stimulating impulse behind, exhausts the heat of the body by the more rapid radiation ; so
that in reality the power to resist cold very soon begins to
decline. This is the reason why a partially intoxicated man is
lost unless he is soon rescued from severe cold.
All the great Arctic travelers attest that ardent spirits lessen
,the power of the human system to resist severe cold. They
depress the vital forces. The heat generating the fael-burning power of the organism is diminished, and great care was
necessary in the supervision of the men to prevent the consumption ofardent spirits. Ross, Kane, Parry, and Franklin,
all attest the same thing. Dr. McRae says: "The moment
that a man had swallowed a drink of spirits it was certain that
his day's work was nearly at an end. It was absolutely necessary that the rule of total abstinence be rigidly enforced if we

NO

AID

TO

DIGESTION.

83

would accomplish our day's task. Whatever it could do for a
sick man, its use as a beverage, when we had work on hand,
in that terrific cold, was out of the question." Now here was
a case of the greatest necessity for alcohol as a food, either in
the form of nitrogen — nourishment — or as respiratory and
heat-producing. If alcohol were hurtful in the time when its
pretended power to benefit was most required, if then it not
only failed but destroyed, how can there be the slightest pretense that it possesses such powers at all ? The experience of
armies, expeditions, and individuals, is all to the same efiect.
Gen. Greely, whose Arctic expedition, the most famous of
any of modern times on account of the suflerings, fortitude
and heroism of those engaged in it, not only declares that alcohol failed utterly as a generator of heat, but also of vitality ;
and in an invaluable article in the Forum, just issued, attests
that powers of endurance not alone of cold, but of all labor
and hardship, are injured by the use of alcohol. This truth is
attested also by the fact that in training for all athletic exercises
liquors are carefully prohibited. These men know their business. Dr. N. S. Davis, of Chicago, proved as long ago as 1850
that during the digestion of all kinds of food the temperature
of the body increased, but that either distilled or fermented
liquors reduced the temperature within half an hour, and that
the depressing process continued several hours, and was just in
proportion to the quantity taken. Drs. Prout, Hammond,
Smith, Richardson, and a great many others, have demonstrated the same facts. In some cases, perhaps, as probably
in that of Liebig, the professional men, like the laity, have
been deceived by the instant flush and surface heat, the efi'ect
of the partial paralysis of the minute blood-vessels, and the
consequent flow of blood to the point where the influence of
the irritant is first felt. Dr. Markham, in summing up a long
discussion on alcohol in the British Medical Journal said :
"Alcohol is not a supporter of combustion. Part, probably
the Avhole of it, escapes from the body ; and none of it, so far
as we know, is assimilated. It is therefore not a food in the
eye of science."
But there is a theory precious to many, that in some way
alcohol aids digestion ; but the verdict of medical science is
that so far from aiding it retards, and if used in large quanti-

84

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

ties prevents digestion wholly. Drs. Todd and Bowman say
that the use of alcoholic stimulants retards digestion by coagulating the pepsin, which is the most important ingredient of
the gastric juice, and were it not that wine, spirits, etc., are
rapidly absorbed, their introduction in any quantity would be
a complete bar to the digestion of food, as the pepsin would
be precipitated from the solution as quickly as it is formed."
Dr. Dundas Thompson says : "This is a remarkable fact, that
when alcohol is added to the digestive fluid it produces a white
precipitate, so that the fluid is no longer capable of digesting
animal or vegetable food." Dr. Monroe proved this by a series
of experiments recorded in "Physiological Action of Alcohol,"
London, 1865. He showed clearly that alcoholics destroy
the solvent power of the gastric juice and prevent digestion,
and that even pale ale, with 5 or 6 per cent, of alcohol, does
not aid digestion. If it destroys the gastric juice which dissolves the food, how can it help digestion? Going over the
whole subject, citing and reviewing numerous authorities, Dr.
Hargreaves concludes it to be "very evident that alcoholic
beverages-do not and cannot aid digestion, but retard and prevent the solution of alimentary substances."
Liebighimselfsays that "wine is superfluous toman
It is constantly followed by an expenditure of power." Drs.
Virchow and Boecker agree that "alcohol poisons the blood,
arrests development and hastens the decay of the red corpuscles," and decreases vitality. Prof. Schultz, Dr. Beale, Dr.
Williams, Dr. Parkes, all great men, say the same. Dr. Benj.
Brodie says ; " Stimulants do not create nerve power, they
merely enable you to use up, as it were what is left." Lallemand and Perrin say alcohol lessens muscular force.
But such citations from the most eminent men in the profession can be made without limit, and I close the chapter.

ALCOHOL

CHAPTER

VI.

THE

OF

CAUSE

DISEASE.

Alcohol the Cause of Disease — Alcohol Attacks the Integrity of the
Body through the Blood — Dr. Dickinson's Account of the Disease it
Fosters — The Ally of Cholera — Recollections of the Cholera Epidemic
in New York, 1832 — Dr. Beaumont's Experiments — Striking Illustration of the Effects of Drink — The Drunkard's Stomach, Reproduced in
Colors — The Curse of Intemperance ti-ansmitted to Posterity — Startling
Facts from Experience — The History of Four Generations of a Family
of Drunkards — The Causes of Insanity — Intemperance Leading them
All.
ALCOHOL
attacks the blood and consequently the integrity of every tissue and living atom of the body. It
follows that its use must produce disease of every organ and
part of the frame. In a work like this it is impossible and
unnecessary to attempt the enumeration of the infinite variety
of diseases of which alcohol is the cause, and much already appears in citations from eminent authorities. But I will insert
the following from a paper read by Dr. W. Dickinson before
the Eoyal Medical and Chirurgical Society, October 22, 1872,
the subject being "The Morbid Effects of Alcohol:"
Alcohol causes fatty infiltration and fibroid encroachment ; it engenders tubercles ; encourages suppuration and retards healing ;
it produces untimely atheroma, invites hemorrhage and anticipates
age. The most constant fatty changes, replacement by oil of the
material of epithelial cells and muscular fibers, though probably
nearly universal, is most noticeable iu the liver, the heart and the
kidneys. The fibroid increase occurs about vascular channels and
superficial investments of the viscera, where it causes atrophy, cirrhosis and granulation. Of this change the liver has the largest
share ; the lungs are often similarly but less simply affected, the
change being variously complicated with, or simulative of tubercle ;
the kidneys suffer in a more remote degree.
Alcohol also causes vascular deteriorations, which are akin both
to the fatty and the fibroid. Besides tangible atheroma, there are
minute changes in the arterial walls, which of themselves induce
85

8Q

THE

TEMPEUANCE

MOVEMENT.

cardiac hypertrophy and cerebral hemorrhage. Drink causes tuberculosis, which is evident not only in the lungs, but in every amenable organ. Drink promotes the suppurative at the expense of
the adhesive process, as seen in the results of pneumonia, of serious
inflammations and of accidental injuries. Descending from general conditions to the individual organs, the effect of alcohol upon
the nervous system must be looked upon as special and taken by
itself. Apart from the changes which, like delirium tremens, are
more evident during life than after death, the brain pays a large
reckoning in the shape of inflammation, atrophy and hemorrhage.
With regard to the other organs, they are damaged by alcohol,
much as they stand in its line of absorption.
Next to the stomach, the liver suffers, by way of cirrhosis and
fatty impregnation. Next the stress falls upon the lungs, taking
every shape of phthisis. A large share in the pathology of intemperance isalso taken by the arterial system, as seen in its results :
atheroma, cardiac hypertrophy and hemorrhage. Lastly the kidneys, more remotely exposed, have small participation in the common damage of alcoholism. They undergo congestive enlargement,
fatty and fibroid change, but they do not suffer commensurately
with the blood-vessels, or as frequently as the other viscera.
Nor does there appear to be power in alcohol to prevent
disease in any known case. It has been said that it would
prevent cholera, but Dr. Jameson says in his treatise on that
dread disease : " His great love is for drunkards and the high
fed." In fact alcohol predisposes the system to the disease.
Prof. Mackintosh says that five sixths of all who have fallen
by cholera in England were persons of intemperate and dissolute habits.
Dr. Mussey said that if he must drink any quantity of
alcohol in a specified time he should think it best to take it in
distilled liquors rather than cider, wine or beer, and that on
the Ohio river the increase of brandy drinking consequent
upon the approach of cholera has been frightful, and the
mortality on board terrible and unprecedented. One boat
lost 43, another 47, and a third 59 of its passengers and crew."
Dr. Adams, Professor of the Institute of Medicine in the
Anderson University of Glasgow, says that of his intemperate
cholera patients 91^ per cent. died. "I have found the use
of alcoholic drinks to be a great disposing cause of malignant
cholera
I would placard every spirit shop in town
with these words : "cholera

sold here."

DR. beaumont'8

observations.

87

The authorities are legion to the same effect.
On the other hand total abstinence prevents cholera. From
the statistics of the disease in 1832 in New York, out of 5,000
members of temperance societies only two died ; in several of
the societies none whatever. In New Orleans the proportion
of deaths to population was 15 to 1,000; of those belonging to temperance organizations only 2.5 in 1,000, and the
statistics are substantially the same in Scotland, England,
India, and in all countries. Dr. Hargreaves, with his usual
marvelous care, goes over the subject and thus gives the conclusion of the whole matter : " There is not a disease we are
satisfied but what may be aggravated by alcohol, and we are
equally satisfied that total abstinence from alcoholics, and
temperance in all things are the only preventives of disease. ^^
The stomach and entire digestive apparatus are specially
subject to injury by use of alcohol because it acts like a
poison, searing and corroding the soft vascular tissues and
surfaces of which these organs are composed. Its use is a
perpetual cauterization of parts wliicli no more require such
treatment than the healthy eyeball, and it does not lessen
the injury that it goes on within, among the hidden processes
of life.
The recorded observations of Dr. Beaumont, made daily for
years, of the interior of the stomach of Alexis St. Martin are
of peculiar value, as St. Martin's case was the only like opportunity ever afforded to the human eye. St. Martin w-as a
French Canadian soldier, who was shot in the stomach while
on guard duty in the American service at Michilimackinac, in
the year 1822. Dr. William Beaumont, surgeon of the post,
dressed the wound, but in healing, an aperture was left through
which, by pushing the parts aside, the interior and w\alls of the
stomach and the process of digestion were visible. Dr.
Beaumont seized the opportunity and immortalized both his
patient and himself. St. Martin married, had a large family
and lived to a good old age. Dr. Beaumont prepared him a
pad or compress for the aperture in the stomach, which served
him so well, that he was able not only to get on wnth the
necessary processes of digestion, but to indulge in a tendency
to convivial habits quite as frequently as was beneficial to
himself.
It, however, gave the vigilant doctor an opportunity

00

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

to describe the effects of alcohol upon this organ, whose function is the foundation of life, and thus to turn the excesses of
his subject into authentic and indisputable sources of warning
to others. Dr. Beaumont published a book in which he
recorded " thousands of his experiments and observations,"
from which I take the following, calling attention to the fact
that this was before the "temperance craze," and the work can
not be impeached as that of a temperance " crank."
He says of " Experiments and Observations on the Gastric
Juice and Physiology of Digestion," referring to observations
on St. Martin :
July 8th, 9 o'clock a. m. Stomach empty ; not healthy ; some inflammation with ulcerous patches on mucous surface. St. Martin been
drinking freely for eight or ten days ; complains of no pain, nor
shows symptoms of any general indisposition ; says he feels well,
and has a good appetite. August 1st, 8 o'clock, a. m. Examined
stomach before eating anything ; inner membrane morbid, considerable inflammation, and some ulcerous patches on the exposed surface, secretions vitiated. Extracted about an ounce of gastric
juice, not clear and pure as in health ; quite viscid. August 2d,
8 o'clock, A. M. Circumstances and appearances very similar to those
of yesterday morning. Extracted an ounce of gastric juice, consisting of unusual proportion of vitiated mucus, saliva, and some
bile, tinged slightly with blood, appearing to exude from the surface
of the inflammation, and ulcerous patches, which were more tender
and irritable than usual.
St. Martin complains of no pain.
August 3d, 7 o'clock, a. m. Inner membrane of stomach
unusually morbid ; inflammatory appearance more extensive, and
(ulcerous) spots more livid ; from the surface of some of which
exuded small drops of grumous (or thick, clotty) blood.
The ulcerous patches larger and numerous ; the mucous covering
(the thin sensitive lining membrane) thicker than common ; and the
gastric secretion much more vitiated. The gastric fluids extracted
this morning were mixed with large proportions of thick, ropy
mucus, and considerable muco-purulent matter, slightly tinged with
blood, and resembling the discharge from the bowels in some cases
of chronic dysentery. Notwithstanding this diseased appearance
of the stomach, no very essential aberration of its functions was
manifested. St. Martin complains of no symptoms indicating any
general derangement of the system, except an uneasy sensation and
a tenderness at the pit of the stomach, and some vertigo, with dimness and yellowness of vision, on stooping and rising again ; has a

THE drunkard's STOMACH.

89

thin yellowish brown coat on his tongue, and the countenance is
rather sallow.
August 4th, 8 o'clock, a. m. Stomach empty ; less of those
ulcerous patches than yesterday ; inflammatory appearances more
extensively diffused over the inner coats, and the surface inclined
to bleed ; secretions vitiated. Extracted about an ounce of gastric
fluids, consisting of ropy mucus, some bile and less of muco-purulent matter than yesterday ; odor peculiarly fetid and disagreeable."
August 5th, 8 o'clock, a. m. Stomach empty ; coats less morbid
than yesterday, mucus more uniform, soft and nearly of the
natural healthy color ; secretions less vitiated. Extracted about an
ounce of gastric fluids ; more clear and pure than that taken four
or five days past, and slightly acid, but containing a larger quantity
of mucus and more opaque than usual in a healthy condition.
August 6th, 8 o'clock, a. m. Stomach empty ; coats clear and
healthy as usual ; secretions less vitiated. Extracted two ounces
of gastric fluids of more natural and healthy appearance, with the
usual gastric acid flavor ; complains of no uueasy sensations or
the slightest symptoms of indisposition ; says he feels well, and has
a voracious appetite ; but not permitted to indulge it to satiety. He
has been restricted from full, and confined to low, diet, and simple
diluent drinks, for the last four days, and has not been allowed to
take any stimulating liquors, or to indulge in excesses of any kind.
These morbid changes and conditions are seldom indicated by
any ordinary symptoms, or particular sensations described or complained of, unless when in considerable excess. It is interesting to
observe to what extent the stomach, perhaps the most important
organ of the animal system, may become diseased without manifesting any external symptoms of such disease. Vitiated secretions
may also take place, and continue for some time without affecting
the health in a sensible degree.
These observations of Dr. Beaumont

are universally cited

by the profession. They are to be found in Dr. Hargreaves*
" Alcohol and Science." Dr. Hargreaves malves the following
remark upon them and further citation from Dr. Beaumont :
Too high a value cannot be placed upon these observations of
Dr. Beaumont, as they are ocular demonstrations, " actual views of
the stomach, from day to day, for years ; the actual observations
in health and disease ; the effects of the various foods and drinks
upon the stomach."
He says clearly and distinctly :
" The free use of ardent spirits, wine, beer or any of the intoxicating liquors, when continued for some days, has constantly produced morbid changes."
It is not " ardent spmts " alone that pro-

90

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

duce these morbid changes ; but even " wine and beer." Nor are
these changes indicated by any ordinary symptoms, or particular
sensations described or complained of, unless when in considerable
excess. They could not, in fact, have been anticipated by any
external symptoms, and their existence was only ascertained by
ocular demonstrations.
As a further illustration of the effect of alcohol upon the
stomach, the plates prepared by Dr. Sewell, Professor of
Pathology and Practice of Medicine in the Columbia College,
District of Columbia, "being the result of a professional
career of upwards of thirty years," are inserted. During
this long term Dr. Sewell had many opportunities to inspect
the stomachs of drunkards after death, in the various stages
and degrees of drunkenness, and had these plates prepared to
represent, with accuracy, some of the morbid changes which
take place in the stomach from alcoholic intemperance. Their
great importance must not be overlooked. They are not idle
school-boy pictures, drawn chiefly to show their own paint.
They are the pains-taking work of an able and conscientious
pathologist and eminent instructor in his profession. The
written record of volumes is here condensed upon a single
page.
The first illustration is of the perfectly healthy stomach, and
is drawn by Prof. Horner, of Philadelphia, with great care
from a remarkably good subject.
The second illustration exhibits the internal surface of the
stomach of the temperate drinker
Here the work
of destruction begins.
The third represents the stomach of the confirmed drunkard
The mucous
coat becomes thickened
and
softened, which often produces ulceration.
The fourth illustration presents a view of the ulcerated or
apthous condition of the drunkard's stomach.
The fifth illustration represents the state of the drunkard's
stomach after a debauch. It was drawn from the stomach of
one who had been for several days in a state of inebriation,
but who came to his death suddenly from another cause.
The sixth explains itself.
I also insert plate of the cancerous stomach produced by
drinkinsr alcohol.
It was drawn from the stomach of one

Dr. N. S, Davis.

LNSAI^ITY

AND

INTEMPERANCE.

91

who never drank to excess, but who died from cancer of the
stomach, induced by moderate drinking, at the age of thirty
years. He appears to have been a perfect gentleman. —
"None knew him but to love him, none named him but to
praise."
The liver secretes bile, which is indispensable to digestion
and renews the blood, each drop of which passes through it
every two minutes. Such is this inscrutable mechanical mystery within us. When the liver is wrons nothing; is rio-ht.
Alcohol eats up the liver, vitiates its structure, softens it to
suppuration, fills it with tubercles and ulcerations, destroys it
as would the envenomed tooth of the moccasin. I can only
insert these plates prepared by science and art, and from subjects taken not from real life, but from real death.
The kidneys eliminate the larger [)ortion of the poisonous
nitrogenous Avaste from the system. When their function is
interrupted the blood al)sorbs the uric poison and every organ
*J

Coo

suffers. Alcohol produces, with all the rest, Bright's disease
— albuminaria — and is the most prolific cause of disease to this
organ, the derangement of which is so replete with misery
and death.
Again I appeal to the plates, which speak so eloquently to
the eye.
Dr. N. S. Davis of Chicago says :
The fatty degenerations of the liver, heart, kidneys, etc., etc.,
are the result of the slow, long-continued, moderate influence of alcohol in retarding the oxidation of the carbonaceous matters of the
system and allowing it to accumulate in the form of inert fat ; while
the acute gastro-duodenitis is the result of the direct irritating influences of strong distilled spirits taken in large quantities, without
ordinary food.
We have repeatedly noted the fact that alcohol has a peculiar avidity for the brain, an appetite as it were for its very
substance. It seems strange that a man " should take an enemy
within to steal away his brain," but so it is, and nothing indicates its canny and devilish nature as does the rage, by which
it seems to be possessed, to strike home upon this organ of the
mental and moral, as well as of the physical nature. It ousts
the soul from the possession of its own homestead. As I contemplate this feature in its character, I confess to a supersti-

92

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

tious questioning whether it be not an actual infernal thing, or
being, rather, more than a mere substance, an entity like
Satan, diffused in the form of liquid, as the malicious genii of
Arabia escaping from confinement, dissolved and expanded in
heavy vapors before the eye.
Certainly there is no conceivable derangement or disease of
the brain and nervous system which alcohol does not originate
or aggravate. Here is a partial list ; " Cerebral congestions,
cerebral hemorrhage with apoplexy, and paralysis, meningeal
apoplexy, cerebral thrombosis, softening of the brain, aphasia, acute cerebral meningitis, chronic meningitis, and all
kinds of insanity ; and among diseases of the spinal cord are
spinal congestion, anterolateral spinal sclerosis, and posterior
spinal sclerosis ; epilepsy, palsy, neuralgia, chorea, and many
other affections of the brain and spinal cord."
If anything could add horror to some of these diseases it is
the dreadful names they are called by. Between the diseases
themselves and the names the doctors give to them poor suffering humanity is doubly afilicted. It would be some relief if
" prohibition " could abolish " cerebral thrombosis " and " anterolateral spinal sclerosis," even if we continued to die of blood
clot in the brain. Dr. Macnish says that in seven cases out of
ten, malt liquor drunkards die of apoplexy or palsy. They
may not be drunkards, but merely use large quantities daily
of ale or beer. Many persons of both sexes are paralyzed by
the use of strong drink. The paralysis, total or partial, of the
lower part of the body and limbs from this cause is very common with both sexes.
Insanity is a natural result of intemperance, and it is agreed
that a great proportion of all that exists is produced by alcohol. Directly and indirectly, probably at least one half of the
insanity of the civilized world is traceable to its use. Dr.
Hargreaves is "strongly impressed with the belief that the
intemperate and (so called) temperate use of alcoholic drinks
produce more insanity than all else combined, excepting hereditary predisposition, and hereditary predisposition is often a
result of the same cause." Lord Shaftsbury, in his evidence
before the Select Committee on Lunatics in 1859, expressed
the opinion that 50 per cent, of the cases admitted into the
English asylum are due to drink.
Dr. Poole fixes the pro-

HEREDITARY

DRUNKARDS.

93

portion at 25 per cent. Dr. Needham, of the New York Lunatic Asylum for both sexes, fixed the proportion in that asylum
at 16 per cent. ; of men alone at 22 per cent. In France, during the war with Prussia, the effect of alcohol in producing
insanity was remarkable. Fifty-five per cent, of the cases admitted to the asylum in May, 1871, were from that cause alone.
Dr. Herman read a paper before the St. Petersburg Medical
Society in which he says that in St. Petersburg " brandy shops
have increased seven-fold since 1859, and are now in the proportion of one to every 293 persons. In the budget for 1866,
the brandy-tax for the entire empire was 115,500,000 silver
rubles. The government and individuals made attempts to
limit the use of brandy ; but they have hitherto yielded to the
resistance of the masses, and the danger of damaging the revenue. One consequence of this increased consumption of
brandy is the increase in the number of acute cases of delirium
tremens admitted into the St. Petersburg hospitals.
"During the five years, 1861-5, there were treated, in five
hospitals, 3,241 cases of delirium tremens, 2,721 males and
420 females ; the mortality from this disease in the difierent
hospitals was from 7.73 to 16.62 per cent. After the trade in
liquors was thrown open, in 1863, delirium tremens became
double in some hospitals, and in others three and fourfold."
Of 286 persons in the lunatic asylum of Dublin 115 were
known to have been intemperate, and alcohol the cause of their
afiliction.
Of patients in the lunatic asylum of Liverpool 257 of 495
were known to have been made insane by drinking. Boyle
says ardent spirits caused one third of the cases of insanity he
has observed. Dr. Shepard, in a letter to the London Times,
that 35 or 40 per cent, of insanity results directly or indirectly
from intoxicating drinks.
I take the following summary from Dr. Hargreave, p. 269,
Alcohol and Science.

After quoting from the reports of the superintendents of
the Pennsylvania Hospital for the Insane, the Massachusetts
State Hospital at Worcester, and the Bloomingdale Asylum,
New York, the nine principal causes of insanity, he says
that :More than 9 per cent, of all the cases of insanity in those three

94

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

institutions is directly caused by intemperance. To merely take
into consideration the cases given in the reports as being thus
caused, we shall not arrive at anything like an approximate estimate of the number ; for the friends will in most cases strive to
keep out of sight, if possible, the drinking habits of the subjects
of insanity. Then again the habits of an individual may not be
what is generally called intemperate, yet he may be so continually
under the influence of alcoholic drinks that the nervous and vital
forces are so depressed and injured that some very slight circumstance, embraced under some one cf the other causes of insanity,
may produce mental alienation^ and the Causes may be given as
being "ill-health," " loss of property," etc., etc., while in reality
it was alcohol.
The loss of property, and other reverses of fortune, are often the
result of intemperance. Hence the difficulty, amounting almost to
impossibility, of arriving at the real cause of insanity.
Taking into consideration all the surrounding circumstances
attending the use of intoxicating drinks, and the essential nature of
alcohol, it will be safe to say that one half of the cases ascribed to
ill-health, or 16 per cent., and one half of the cases of domestic
trouble, or 5 per cent., are directly or indirectly chargeable to alcoholic drinks ; then the cases of insanity due directly or indirectly
to intoxicating liquors will be 9 per cent, directly from intemperance ;1 6 per cent, from ill-health, and domestic trouble, 5 per
cent., or a total of not less than 30 per cent., or from 11,229 to
14,389 insane persons in the United States whose afflictions are
directly or indirectly due to the use of alcohol.
This is evidently no exaggeration, for it is much below the general
average in other countries under similar circumstances of race,
habits, etc.
Close observers of high authority, fix the proportion of
insane in the United States, made so by the direct influence
of liquor, at twenty per cent., and by its indirect influence at
thirty-five per cent, — or fifty-five per cent, of the whole.

But

the conservative and reliable tendency of Dr. Hargreave's mind
is well known, and hence his compilations of statistical matter
upon alcoholism justly command the confidence of intelligent
men almost as fully as the work of official authority.
The sins of the fathers and mothers are visited upon the
children, and those who will impairtheir physical, mental and
moral constitution by contracting and practicing any vice in
justice to those who are yet to be and who are without agency

CAUSES

OF

INSANITY.

95

in procuring their own existence, should be restrained from
the family relation by law, and by the still more efficient prohibition ofsocial ostracism. It is impossible to conceive of a
more hideous crime than that which fastens upon unborn innocence during successive generations the pains and penalties of
outraged natural laws. It often would be a mercy to the helpless, victim, and a wise regulation for the general good, if the
children of diseased and vicious parents could be destroyed
under careful regulations of the State. But our ideas of the
sanctity of human life, even before it is coupled with intelligence and responsibility, will not permit the practice of this
ancient heathen mercy — I had almost said virtue — but which,
with our knowledge of remedy by the observance of natural
laws, would be a crime. It becomes a crime on the part of
society, which has not only the right but the duty to protect
the children who are to be the State, to permit the indiscriminate multiplication of a progeny which, by the immutable
laws of God, now thoroughly revealed in observation and history, and so made a part of the common knowledge of all,
must inherit disease, insanity, idiocy, pain and wicked tendency. The truth and propriety of these propositions will
hardly be questioned. Yet the general disregard of them in
practice is conspicuous. It can only be accounted for by the
very fact of that generality.
Alcoholism, that it might want no feature of hurtful power,
transmits its every curse to posterity, and we find the world
full of helpless sufterers of pain, and criminals ravaging society
from the irresistible force of hereditary taint. Look at Jesse
Pomeroy — one of many. Here is the most horrible part of
the w^hole infernal business. The liquor trade would be comparatively apious work, or at least an innocent recreation, if
it were done wdien the voluntary victim is dead and — perhaps
v7orse than dead. But it strikes through the parent into the
child, and transmits virus instead of life. If prohibition of
the traffic were made absolute to-day, and strictly enforced,
it would be centuries before the human race could throw out
and ofi" the efiects of these generations of vileness which now
rest upon us with all their cumulative force.
Aristotle tells us that a drunken woman brings forth child-

96

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

ren like herself, and we know that the Greeks forbade the use
of wine to women.
Plutarch says that "one drunkard begets another," and it
has become a proverb that "like begets like." Intelligent stock
breeders would know what to do with drunken animals if there
were animals so degraded as to be drunken — and they were
liable to perpetuate their kind.
M. Morel, a distinguished French writer, gives the history
of four generations of a family : First Generation — The
father was an habitual drunkard, and was killed in a publichouse brawl. Second Generation — The son inherited his
father's habits, which gave rise to attacks of mania, terminating in paralysis and death. Third Generation — The grandson was strictly sober, but was full of hypochondriacal and
imaginary fear of persecutions, etc., and had homicidal tendencies. Fourth Generation — The fourth in descent had very
limited intelligence, and an attack of madness when sixteen
years old, terminating in stupidity, nearly amounting to idiocy.
Here we perceive the persistence of the taint, in fact that not
even a generation of absolute sobriety will avert the fatal
issue.
And the same writer elsewhere says that he never saw the
patient cured of his propensity whose tendencies to drink
were given to him by his parents.
The following is upon
good authority : " The wife of an amiable clergyman of S
,
in Staffordshire, England, was so addicted to drunkenness
that she had frequently to be carried to bed. Every effort of
her distressed husband failed to reclaim her ; till at last premature death cut short her career. She was the mother of
three idiotic children."
Dr. Elam says that all the passions appear to be distinct1}^ hereditary — anger, fear, jealousy, libertinage, gluttony,
drunkenness,
especially if both parents are alike
affected
by direct constitutional inheritance.
Dr.
Howe reported to the legislature of Massachusetts that the
habits of the parents of 300 idiots had been learned. One
hundred and forty-five of them were known to be the children
of habitual drunkards ; and he estimates that three fourths of
the idiots are the children of intemperate parents.
Dr. F. E.

CAUSES

OF INSAJSriTT.

97

Dr. F. E. Anstie says : "Where drinking has been strong
in both parents I think it is a physical certainty that it will
be traced in the children."
The following is upon good authority: "The wife of an
amiable clergyman of S
, in Staffordshire, England, was
so addicted to drunkenness that she had frequently to be
carried to bed. Every effort of her distressed husband failed
to reclaim her ; till at last premature death cut short her
career.
She was the mother of three idiotic children."
The world is full of the proof. Every mind recalls its
own well-remembered instances.
It is painful to dwell upon this, to me, most sorrowful
aspect of the liquor crime. Intemperance transmits itself
with the inexorable certainty of gravitation, and it is only
by fortunate surroundings or strong elements of resistance
implanted in his nature from other sources, that the child or
even the great-grandcliild can escape its baneful power.
Can we be human and resist this mute appeal from the
unborn — ^the wailing voices, the upturned, tearful faces, and
the cold white dead of childhood yet to be ?
7

CHAPTER
ALCOHOL

AND

LENGTH

VII.
OF

LIFE.

Investigations of the Svibject by Life Insurance and Provident Associa>tions — Human Life as a Business Commodity — Experience of theGreat English Institutions — Superior Showing made by their Temperance Sections — Cases where the Premiums are Reduced Ten per cent,
for Total Abstainers — Striking Comparisons shown by Diagrams — Experience of the Sons of Tempeiience — Mortality among Beer Sellers
— Testimony of Leading Insurance Experts — Letter from Chief Medical Examiner Lambert of the Equitable.

THE

medical profession is charged by every principle of
honor and duty to know the effect of alcohol upon
human life and health ; we have, therefore, very largely drawn
upon its facts and best intelligence already, as we shall have
occasion to hereafter, not only in this work, but so long as
alcohol is an agent in human affairs. Alcohol in the form of
beverages will die when the medical profession is ready to
kill it. I fear not till then.
But in this chapter I wish to collate facts from the experience and observation of institutions which deal with human life
as a business commodity, and whose prosperity depends
upon their practical and certain knowledge of the conditions
which promote or destroy it.
It is hardly necessary to say that men endeavor to be sure
of their ground before they put their money into it, and the
knowledge upon which great institutions act successfully
during long periods of time, in that sharp competition which
destroys fallacy and all men and organizations of men who do
not build upon the everlasting rock of business truth, is.
entitled to the profoundest respect.
Life insurance and provident institutions have investigated
the alcohol question, not from the stand-point of sentimentalism, but of cash earnings and stock dividends, and in their
researches and observations have employed the highest professional intelligence and business accuracy. Their work has
accumulated for generations, and everything learned has been
utilized as so much increased capital for further investigation,
98

ADVANTAGES

FOE

ABSTAINERS.

99

until now these oro;anizations reo-ulate their action in dealing
with individual men as much with reference to their drinkinff
habits as to the presencQ or absence of tendency to mortal
disease. Let us note some of the facts which have been
developed by their experience and which are now the basis
of their daily action in affairs.
The United Kingdom Temperance and General Provident
Institution of Loudon, England, on the mutual system, was
founded in the year 1840. It was composed of total abstainers
from intoxicating drinks until 1847, but in that year nonabstainers were admitted to policies for the term of life.
The institution began in the year 1855 to declare bonuses to
its policy holders — dividing the surplus of the two sections
among the respective classes of abstainers and non-abstainers.
The premiums in each section are the same, and hence the
amount of these distributions would fairly indicate the health
and life condition of the members as affected by the use of alcohol. It should be observed, however, that the Comparison
would not be between abstainers and the average of the community, for the non-abstainers are always selected subjects
from whom are excluded all who have not good reason to
expect long life, and the habitual use of intoxicating liquors
to even slight excess would be cause of rejection. In such
comparison large numbers show to best advantage, because
the more frequent the admission of fresh members the less the
relative apparent mortality. This will appear from the fact
that if no new members were admitted from year to year the
percentage of death must constantly increase until the last
member dies, whose single death would be 100 per cent, of
the whole, and would extinguish the institution. In the G.
T. and P. Institution the non-abstainers have for many years
outnumbered the abstainers in the proportion of three to two.
There have been five bonuses declared during the period
from 1850 to 1879, inclusive.
PERCENTAGE

BONUSES

Temperance Section.
1855, from 35
cent.
11
75
35 toik
80
18fiO,
u
u
84
ISfia,
56
23 u
u
34
1S70,
per
li
35 li 114
1875,
u
42 u 135
1880,

ON

PEEMIIBIS

1860,
1855. from
1865,
1870,
1875,
1880,

PAID.

General Section.
23
17
24 to
50
5y
40
52
64
20
20
83
26

per cent.

100

THE

TEMPEKANCE

MOVEMENT.

Again, the expectancy of life at any given age is the basis
of the premium paid, and it is fixed at a rate wliich is sure to
cover all probable loss from even exceptionable visitations of
mortality. The consequence is the accumulation which is distributed as above, and it must result, of course, that, as the
amount of bonus paid to the abstainers is the larger, that there
is a smaller percentage of death rate among them than among
the other section. The expected and actual deaths in each
section are shown year by year, in the records of the company
from 1866 to 1882 inclusive, and it appears that in every year
during the entire period the survivals above expectancy were
greater among the abstainers than among the non-abstainers
by a large per cent.
Omitting the single years, the result in groups of five years
is given below :
Temperance Section
Expected deaths. 1 Actual deaths.
1886)
411
to [ 549
1870 J
1871)

1886) General Section.
Expected deaths. 1 Actual deaths.
1871)- 1008
1870
to J
1876)- 1268
to J
1875
1881)

944
1330
1480

to J}■ 723
1875
18
76)

511

to [ 933
1880 j
1881)

651

and J}■ 439
1882

288

1880 J 1485
to
647
1882
and j>

2644

1861

4428

585

4339

Thus the survivals above expectancy in the Temperance Section from 1866 to 1882—17 years— was 783, or 29.5 per cent,
of the total of expectancy, while in the General Section, itself
made up of persons of good habits and exceptional vigor, the
survivals were but 69, or 1.5 per cent. If the membership
of the General Section had been the same as that of the Temperance Section, the survivals in the General Section would
have been 46, or two thirds of 69, which is one seventeenth the
survivals in the Temperance Section.
Rev. Dawson Burns, commenting on these facts in his valuable compilation, "The Vital Statistics of Total Abstinence,"
says : " If in a comparison with selected lives of adults the
Temperance Section showed a superiority of 28 per cent."

■■aossc/ic.mf^.)

Dr. I. K. Fitnk,
Editor of " llie Voice.'''

ENGLISH

EXPEEIENCE.

101

(29-1 — 1.1.,) "it is reasonable to infer that — taking the
whole population and remembering how large a portion of
adult and infant life is sacrificed to intemperance and its effects,
an equal saving of life would result from the universal adoption
of total abstinence, ii'ow the population of the United Kingdom was estimated in the middle of 1882 to be 35,250,000 ;
and the deaths in 1882 were 678,486 (England, 516,783;
Scotland, 72,966 ; Ireland, 88,737) ; and on an estimate of 28
per cent, we have 189,980 lives sacrificed, in one form or
other, to alcohol, that miijht have been saved in one sino-le
year by universal total abstinence. This number far exceeds
the estimate of 40,000 persons directly slain each year by
drink, and 80,000 others sacrificed by privations, neglect,
accidents, etc., a total of 120,000; but it falls short of Dr.
Kichardson's estimate of the hygienic results of a state of perfect abstention from intoxicating liquors."
The Briton Life Association insures total abstainers at a
reduction of ten per cent, of the regular premiums, and the
Emperor Life Assurance Society at a considerable reduction.
In the Sceptre Life Association, according to a printed document, the deaths in the General Section, during the seven years
ending December 31st, 1882, were 335 out of 438 expected,
or 24 per cent, below expectancy, and in the Temperance Section, 73 out of 165 expected, or 56 per cent, below expectancy.
The Secretary writes, Oct. 22, 1883 : "For eighteen years,
ending 31st of December last, we expected 270 claims in the
Temperance Section, but had 116 only. Of our new insured
over 40 per cent, are total abstainers. Dr. Burns adds : "The
saving of life has been at the rate of 57 per cent. In the Victoria Mutual Assurance Society, up to a certain time, the
claims against the premiums in the Temperance Section had
absorbed 20.3 per cent, as compared with 33.2 per cent, in the
General Section, all other conditions of comparison being substantially the same.
The twenty-sixth Annual Eeport of the Wbittington Life
Assurance Company, September, 1881, mentions the favorable
rate of mortality in the Temperance Section, and the same in
the report of the following year.
The Independent Order of Eechabites, of Manchester,
England, was formed in 1835.
Dr. Thornleyread a paper at

102

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Bolton, November 9th, 18B2, in which he compares the health
and death rate of this model order of abstainers with the same
in the Independent Order of Odd Fellows, who as a class are
certainly far above the average of the community in regard
to good habits and comfortable surromidings. "In Blackburn,
Bolton and Manchester are 3400 Rechabites ; their deaths
in 1876 were 46—13.5 per 1000. In the Bolton District of
Rechabites that year the death rate was 11.2 per 1000. In
Blackburn there are 3500 Odd Fellows, and in 1876 they had
76 deaths, 21.42 per 1000."
In sickness the Rechabites have 16.2 per cent, while the
Odd Fellows had 20.53 per cent. The average duration of
sickness of the Rechabites was five weeks, two days and
twenty-one hours ; of the Odd Fellows eight weeks, five days
and eight hours. Of every 100 Rechabites 16 were sick : of the
Odd Fellows 20 were sick. In the Bolton District for ten years
the death rate among the Rechabites was 13 per 1000, while
that of the Odd Fellows in the Blackburn district was 19 per
1000. Deaths during prevalence of typhoid fever, Rechabites
18 per 1000, that of Odd Fellows 31 per 1000 in the same
district — Over Darwen. But at the same time in the same
district the publicans, liquor dealers, came to the front with a
grim prominence of mortality at the rate of 150 per 1000 —
eight publicans to one Rechabite.
The Sanitary Review, after a long and careful comparison
of vital statistics concerning the Rechabites and Odd Fellows,
concludes thus : " Should the Rechabites at any future time
muster half a million, the annual saving of life, were the same
low mortality to continue, would exceed 2500 lives." This is
in comparison with the Odd Fellows — one of the best-managed
and the largest non-abstinent friendly societies in the world.
Comparison of the Sons of Temperance with other friendly
societies of non-abstainers show similar results. The London
Temperance Hospital has been in operation from October 6,
1873, up to April 30, 1883, 9.5 years. Alcohol is absolutely
excluded. The average rate of mortality was 4.5 per cent.
The number of in-patients was 1765, of out-patients
12,883. The percentage of mortality is of the in-patients.
In the Manchester Royal Infirmary and Cheadle and
Monsall Infirmary in ten years, 50,670, in-patients were

COMPARATIVE

LENGTH

OF

LIFE.

103

treated from 1873 to 1882, and the mortality was 8.7 of the
whole number. During this period the managers seem to
have been gradually tending to the disuse of alcohol as a
remedy and with a decreasing mortality as the result.
Dr. Hargreaves gives it as his deliberate opinion — considering besides the sickness and death of adults, the thousands who die in infancy and childhood by neglect, imperfect
nourishment, deprivations, etc., resulting from the use of
strong drinks — that one half oi all the sickness a,nd py^emature
death in the civilized world is directly or indirectly produced
by the use of aloholic drinks.
Nielson's statistics show that the mortality of the intemperate
from 21 to 30 years is five times that of the temperate ; from
30 to 40, four times.
Beer drinkers live an average of 21.7 years after contracting
the habit; spirit drinkers, 16.7 years; those who drink both,
16.1 years. Dr. Carpenter says the average yearly rate of
mortality for the whole population of England is 13 per 1000 ;
those insured in life insurance companies, 11 per 1000 ; in
*' Friendly Societies" 10 per 1000; in the Kechabites, who
are total abstainers, 7.5 per 1000.
Four of the best Life Insurance Companies make the following showing as compared with the Temperance Provident
Institution during the same period :
Life Co. A issued
944 policies, had 14 deaths, equal to 15 per 1,000
"
B
"
1.907
"
27
"
"
14
"
C
"
8:38
"
11
"
"
13
D
"
2,470
"
65
"
"
22
T. P. I. "
1,596
"
12
"
"
71

Thus it is seen that total al)stinence reduces the death rate
one half and more i)elow that of persons of good health who
are not total abstainers.
Nielson says that a temperate person at the age of 20 has
the life expectancy of 44 years ; at 30 years of age, 36 years ;
at 40, 28 years ; at 50, 22 years ; at 60, 14 years. The
intemperate person at 20 has an expectancy of 15 years —
one third that of the abstainer; at 30, 13 years; at 40, 11
years ; at 50, 10 years ; and at 60, 9 years. The average
duration of life after commencing the use of alcoholic drinks
is, among mechanics and laborers, 18 years ; store-keepers
and gentlemen 15 years ; and among females 14 years.

104

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Among innkeepers and publicans the death rate per 1000
is, according to Mr. Nielson, 25 yearly, while of the general
population it is 16.2, and as we have seen, among Rechabites
and total abstainers, it is 7.5.
When a policy holder inquired of Mr. Hardy, the actuary,
why the bonus is so large in the Temperance Section as
compared with the General Section, he replied : " The
Bonus is a matter of fact. I cannot help people dying.
Those who don't drink don't die so fast."
Dr. Willard Parker, so long at the head of the medical profession and so generally known by the American people, who
loved him while living, and who now holds his virtues, abilities and eminent services in sacred memory, said in a public
address, " That SS^ per cent, of all the deaths in New York
city were occasioned directly or indirectly by the use of alcoholic drinks." Dr. Frank says that no more fatal gift than the
art of distillation " was ever presented either by men or devils."
T7ie Insurance Guide of England, as cited by Dr. Hargreaves, contains the following: "The mortality of the rum
and beer shop-keepers is in excess of the mortality of all other
classes.
Thus, for instance, during the year at a given age :
died
Out of every 1000 farmers
((
shoe-makers
weavers
<(((
blacksmiths
tailors and carpent ers
a
miners
bakers
((
butchers

12
15
15
16
17
20
21
23

inn unf] bppr shnn -kppDfii rs 28
- whole popuThe general mortality at the same age among << the
lation of England being 18 per 1000." It should also be
remembered that most of these men of all occupations are
drinkers themselves ; but, as it is, more than two of the liquors

sellers die to one farmer, and nearl}'- two of several other
occupations as, compared with total abstainers. Recalling
the small mortality of Rechabites per thousand (7.5) it would
appear to be certain that the mortality of the liquor seller as
compared with the total abstainer w^ould be at least three times

RELATIVE

MORTALITY

IN

DIFFERENT

OCCUPATIONS.

105

as great. But for the presence of alcohol all these adults are
engaged in healthy occupations, and the high rates of mortality
among them are probably due to that cause.
The following diagram is prepared by Rev. William
Burgess, of Canada, who has recently published an important work, "Land, Labor and Liquor," from the Report
of the Register General of England for 1880, 1881 and
1882. Where 1000 represents the deaths among all males,
1361 represents the deaths among brewers, and 1521 deaths
among saloon-keepers, beer-dealers, etc.

«.
900

ssos-

^

f5bo

1 ^

ts^f /s-it

w

is

fSes.

^

8-?/

fOOO

ffOVtl

1

So/

■Sti-S .65/

1

)ro/

•a

1

1?

1

.5^

•J

'i

^o

t

N

5

i

«

N

It

>• ^

—n
106

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

<<

«.. vj
'^ '
o
■
>
L
I call special attention to this striking diagram taken from

in
an important article in the Homiolectic LuRevieiv.
C t^ O QJ c c a^<_S ^ o

>
%
\ ^
\

i. N

^

'

—

.

^

V\

H

4

^
tj

^>
V

,H

w

H
O

en
rn

ao
to

uK
§

V'.

00

fv^
^
^

^^

(-1

i"^ ^- "— " Q^ *-'

c*

I;

,2© tecs

^ a;>
H ^

f,^

. S

S'.

1:

CO

r.« \

f^

e«1 \

00

'A

1

oCO

J

o

r

00

cvi
CO

01
T!=^^ b-c t--^ £ 2m d5 j3
**><i>
g,2i »;'-;=^ '^'H Op ^^
+3 o £ '^; E.^:; £^ J:; 5 :

0
rvj
OD

pj= f <i>0

Et; O

?
1

O

c:- ;>^ ;t^ a

IK-—

'S Stpo ? alf^^i
2|ct:S3*2ct;5 §.3
. ,
c S: !>-fi
e o<^-^

\ \\,
\

o

•^ rr c -^ r: ^K

ID

1

00 5

K

_

|Pr,S O O g -^ C ai'SiA

to

al^;

;z; p^
■Pi
•Ah
W

-at

Vr, I— 1 r'
LO
CO
ID

i ?

I

o ;3^

fcrJCio > &S 5:J Sew ?^+3

III

i ♦, ^

< ■a;_,^
W

10
CD
u-5

^

f p Si
1V ^s 1
k^ 1
Ji

p

•\

en

^
\

k-

s

' .^

^

\ ^.

*^

W

\. n
^ r

l|

^

\\

r*>,

c

W
U

ot/J

S o cj S C ^ S S5 o^V

o _ trt>i^
(E ^0 c:-"^:*^
big
CJ ■- *^ m ^ 0) o'

LO
0
1.0

"^

N

rvi
Q:

"^

^. c

to

Uj

03,

>-&• ^
V*.,n;

^ s*

Y

U3
CO
CO

CO

V'

—

cr5
10
(VI

\\

i\

s-

^

q;''

C C '^ CC' =;■ CJ 't^ ,^'^p^ CO +3

LO

CO

=1
H
P3
m

oi

CVJ

g

s

\
\

CO
O
M

uo
iri
o

00

CD

CD

o

<Z3

C\J
C3

OT
cn

CD
CD
CVJ

CD

UJ

gS "g-d£o.S^.5og

5^

EXPERT

TESTIMONY.

107

By the Pennsylvania Insurance Keport for the year ending
December 31, 1874, it appears that during the preceding year
the deaths were :
Western Masonic, R. A
14 per 1000,
Odd Fellows
6 "
"
United Brethren (M.)
8 "
"
Temperance Mutual Benefit |^
. ^^
^^
Association of Pennsylvania, )
In all these societies there are many total abstainers, so that
a just comparison would be mucli more in favor of total
abstinence tlian even the above indicates.
This table is prepared by Dr. Edward Jarvis, a distinguished
American statistician.
Deaths in 100,000.

Ages of persons.
15 to 20 years .
20 to 30 years .
30 to 40 years .
40 to 50 years .
50 to GO years .
60 to 90 years.

Intemperate.

1,342
4,953
54,620
992
6,418
56,174

Teniperate.

730
974
1,110
1,452
2,254
33,260

Comparative rate of deaths in equal numbers of intfimpe
rate and temperate persons of all ages the same j-ear

Comparative
Mortality.rate of
Intemperate.

Others.
10

18
42
51
41
13
29

10
10
10
10
10

33

It will be observed here that the table is not a comparison
of abstainers, but of those who are not intemperate with those
who are. Yet three times as large a proportion of the latter
die as of the former, in the same year, out of a given 100,000.
The practice and the testimony of all the great life insurance
companies of our own country — and they are by far the liest in
the world—is to the same elFect as that which has been cited from
English sources. These companies, in order to do business
largely, are obliged to insure non-abstainers, because, unfortunately, the totally abstinent are not the many but the few, and
there is among the managers of these companies considerable
conservatism, not to say sensitiveness, on the subject, partly,
it may be, on account of a predilection for the article which
they are liable to have in common with the rest of the community— the same that w^e find with the medical profession —
but more particularly from a disinclination to condemn the
habits of society, always an unpalatable thing to do, since one

108

THE

TEIVIPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

thereby not only reflects upon his associates, but often still
more severely upon himself.
I have personally made inquiry of the officers of several of
the leading life insurance companies of this country, however,
and find universal agreement to the disastrous effect of liquors
upon life when used as a beverage. I also find a disinclination to contribute anything to the growing restiveness of total
abstainers with the heavy and unjust burdens so long imposed
upon them in their classification with drinking, and often
drunken policy holders, in consequence of which their good
habits are made to pay the death losses of those who never
should have been insured at all, and never could be without
ruin to the companies, but for the long-paying lives of the
totally abstinent.
There is a great deal of humbug in this world, and more or
less of it is found out after a while. I believe that but for the
drinking of policy holders of life insurance in this country
the business could be as profitably done as it now is for forty
per cent, of the premiums now paid ; and if life insurance managers fully improved the great opportunity given them to
influence the people they could contribute more than any other
class of men, except the medical profession, to the eradication
of this terrible evil.
These tremendous companies, now among the most colossal
monetary forces of the country, have it in their power to confer
benefits commensurate with those they receive from the public
by striking both with precept and with business weapons at
the baleful drinking habits of those whom they insure. More
and more they are doing this, and I believe that the Temperance Reform will soon count these great companies among
their strongest allies. If not, the present companies will find
their best risks quitting them for new organizations, which will
act not alone for pecuniary success by dealing with human
vitality as purely a business commodity, but will inflexibly
demand absolute sobriety in all who are insured, or that
drinkers be classified by themselves so that they can pay for
their own excesses. It is unjust to the virtuous and temperate that they be obliged to buy life insurance for the
defective classes any longer.
As indicating the awakened attention of leading life insur-

y. N. Steams,
j\'ational Temperance

Society.

TESTIMONY

OF

LIFE

ASSURANCE

OFFICERS.

109

ance men to this subject, I insert the following communications
drawn out by the Voice, the able and indefatigable organ of
the Prohibitory party. These communications were published
in the first and fourth numbers of that paper, the last being
issued Oct. 16, 1884, and they constitute one of the many
great services of that journal in arousing the public mind to
the vast importance of the cause of temperance.
TESTIMONY

OF

LIFE

ASSURANCE

OFFICERS.

Col. Greene, tlie President of the Connecticut Mutual Life
Insurance Co., one of the oldest and largest companies in the
country, has put himself on record thus :
It has been my duty to send the records of, and to make iuquiry
into, the last ilhiess and death of many thousand persons of all
classes ih all parts of the country. Two great features are shown
in these records : the value of a man's inheritance of vitality, and
the modifying force of habits of living upon that vitality. Every
man is born with an amount of vital force that ought, accidents
apart and humanely speaking, to cany him a specific distance on
the scale of years, and each man's inheritance can, on the average,
be fairly determhied. Among the persons selected with care for
physical soundness and sobriety, and who are, as a rule, respectable and useful members of society, the death-rate is more profoundly
affected by the use of intoxicating drinks than from any other one
cause, apart from hereditary.
The testimony of the same expert authority, as to beer, is
equally emphatic :
I protest against the notion so prevalent and so industriously urged
that beer is harmless, and a desirable substitute for the more concentrated liquors. What beer may be and what it may do in other countries and climates, I do not know from observation. That in this
country and climate its use is an evil only less than the use of whisky,
if less on the whole, and that its effect is only longer delayed, not
so immediately and obviously bad, its incidents not so repulsive, but
destructive in the end, I have seen abundant proof. In one of our
largest cities, containing a great population of beer drinkers, I had
occasion to note the deaths among a large group of persons whose
habits, in their own eyes and in those of their friends and physicians,
were temperate ; but they were habitual users of beer. When the
observation began, they were, upon the average, something under
middle age, and they were, of course, selected lives. For two or
three years there was nothing very remarkable to be noted among this

110

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

group. Presently death began to strike it ; and, until it had dwindled
to a fraction of its original proportions, the mortality in it was astounding in extent, and still more remarkable in the manifest identity of
cause and mode. There was no mistaking it ; the history was almost
invariable ; robust, apparent health, full muscles, a fair outside, increasing weight, florid faces ; then a touch of cold, or a sniff of
malaria, and instantly some acute disease, with almost invariably
typhoid symptoms, was in violent action, and ten days or less ended
it. It was as if the system had been kept fair outside while within it
was eaten to a shell ; and at the first touch of disease there was utter
collapse ; every fiber was poisoned and weak. And this, in its main
features, varying, of course, in degree, has been my observation of
beer drinking everywhere. It is peculiarly deceptive at first ; it is
thoroughly destructive at the last.
Col. Greene's experience, as given above, in reference to
beer as well as alcohol, was fully indorsed by that of nine
presidents of our leading insurance companies in letters addressed to The Voice, and published in October, 1884. James
W. Alexander, Vice-president of the Equitable Life, wrote
December 5, 1884:
How often what even we designate as moderate drinking expands
into immoderate drinking, and causes early death, is hardly realized
by those who do not have the evidence brought under their eyes as
we do.
Dr. Walter R. Gillette, Medical Director of the Mutual
Life, wrote January 3, 1885 :
With all our care and investigations, the [Mutual] Company is
called upon yearly to pay losses due both directly and indirectly to the
use of alcohol, which, could the figures be accurately ascertained,
would be appalling.
From Thomas W.
Life Insurance Co. :

Russell, President Connecticut General

I have no doubt the results are correctly stated by Col. Greene.
Pneumonia, typhoid fever, inflammation of the brain, of the bowels,
etc., are not unfrequently given as the cause of death, when it should
be truthfully added — directly induced by the use of such beverages.
From

George C. Ripley, Pres. Home

Life Insurance Co. :

Our experience, as a rule, confirms that of Col. Greene. It indicates that malt liquors used habitually, even though moderately, cause
an increase of mortality.
From

T. H. Brosnan, Pres. U. S. Life Insurance Co. :

INSURANCE

TESTIMONY.

Ill

Our experience has been very much more limited than the experience of the Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance Co., but, as far as it
has gone, and to the extent of our own powers of observation, whether
speaking officially or personally, we believe that Col. Greene's views
represent the facts. There are, of course, cases where persons are
advised to take, and are benefited by taking, malt liquors daily. But
when persons are addicted to the habitual use of ale or beer daily it
would be hard to define the limits within which they could be called
moderate drinkers. The ability to attend to business is not a test ta
be relied on.

From J. B. Temple, Pres. Southern Mutual Life Insurance
Co.,Ky.:
I cannot say that I have such wide experience as Col. G-reene's, but
I do not doubt the correctness of his conclusions. In the case of
moderate drinking either of malt or spirituous liquors, there is smaU
hope that the habitual drinker will remain a moderate one.

From A. G. Bullock, Pres. State Mut. Life Assurance Co. :
I have not examined the subject as thoroughly as Col. Greene has
and cannot answer, therefore, -with as much confidence from personal
knowledge. But generally, I will answer, my experience confirms
that narrated by him. My experience is that the habitual use of beer^
ale, etc., even by moderate drinkers, increases mortality.

From Stephen Ball, Sec'y of the Hartford Life and Annuity
Insurance Co. :
From our general observations, we should take it for granted that a
careful examination of our mortality experience Avould not fail to confirm the experience of Col. Greene.
From Sam'l C. Huey, President of the Penn. Mutual Life
Insurance Co. :

My experience confirms to a great degree the experience of Col.
Greene. I consider that malt liquors taken habitually by a moderate
drinker tend to increase mortality.
From J. H. Nitchiu, Sec'y National Life Insurance Co., U.

S. of A. :

In general our experience justifies the conclusions expressed by CoL
Greene.

From Charles Dewey, Pres. National Life Insurance Co. :
Our experience confirms that of Col. Greene, of the Connecticut
Mortality, in our opinion, is increased by the habitual
Mutual Life.
use of malt liquors — beer, ale, etc.

112

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

The following extract from the Pacific Medical Journal is
indorsed by the officers of the Home Life Insurance Company
(New York) , and made use of by them in the form of a circular :
The fashion of the present day, in the United States, sets strongly towards the substitution of beer for other stimulating hquors.
An idea appears to be gaining ground that it is not only nutritious but conducive to health, and, further, that there does not
attach to it that danger of creating intemperate habits which attends
the use of other drinks. The subject is one of great magnitude,
and deserves the attention of medical men as well as that of the
moralist.
Many years ago, and long before the moral sense of society was
awakened to the enormous evils of intemperance. Sir Astley Cooper,
an undisputed authority in his day, denounced habitual beer drinking as noxious to health. Referring to his experience in Guy's
Hospital, he declared that the beer drinkers from the London
breweries, though presenting the appearance of most rugged health,
were the most incapable of all classes to resist disease — that trifling
injuries among them were liable to lead to the most serious consequences, and that so prone were they to succumb to disease that
they would sometimes die from gangrene in wounds as trifling as
the scratch of a pin.
We apprehend that no great change either in beer or men has
taken place since the days of the great surgeon.
It may also be said of beer drinking that there is less limitation
to it than to the habitual use of other drinks. It does not produce
speedy intoxication. When the drinker becomes accustomed to it,
it will scarcely produce active intoxication in any quantity. It
makes him heavy, sleepy and stupid. Even in moderate quantities
its tendency is to dullness and sluggishness of body and mind. Beer
drinkers are constant drinkers. Their capacity becomes unlimited.
The swilling of the drink becomes a regular business. It has no
arrest or suspension, like whiskey-drinking, to admit of recuperation. The old definition of a regular beer drinker was true :—
*' Every morning an empty barrel, every night a barrel of beer."
Of all intoxicating drinks it is the most animalizing. It dulls
the intellectual and moral, and feeds the sensual and beastly nature.
Beyond all other drinks, it qualifies for deliberate and unprovoked
crime.
In this respect it is much worse than distilled liquors.
A whiskey drinker will commit murder only under the direct
excitement of liquor — a beer drinker is capable of doing it in cold
blood.
Long observation has assured us that a large proportion

BEER

WORSE

THAN

WHISKY.

113

of murders deliberately planned and executed without passion or
malice, with no other motive than the acquisition of property or
money, often of trifling value, are perpetrated by beer drinkers.
We believe, further, that the hereditary evils of beer drinking
€xceed those proceeding from ardent spirits. First, because the
habit is constant and without paroxysmal interruptions, which
admit of some recuperation ; secondly, because beer drinking is
practiced by both sexes more generally than the spirit drinking ;
and, thirdly, because the animalizing tendency of the habit is more
uniformly developed, thus authorizing the presumption that the
vicious results are more generally transmitted.
It will be inferred from these remarks that we take no comfort
from the substitution of malt drinks for spirituous liquors. On
the contrary, it is cause of apprehension and alarm that, just as
public opinion, professional and unprofessional, is uniting all over
the world in the condemnation or the common use of ardent spirits,
the portals of danger and death are opening wide in another
direction.
It gives me great pleasure now to insert the following personal letter from tlie chief medical examiner of the New York
Equitable Life Insurance Company, whose opinions, from his
great ability, long experience and responsible connection with
one of the leading life insurance companies of the world, as
well as his caution and conservatism, are entitled to profound
respect :
Medical Department of the Equitable Life Assurance Society^
120 Broadway, New York, July 8, 1S87.
Dear Sir :— Yesterday j'ou called in to see me, and requested me
to give you the result of my observations in regard to the use of
alcohol. Please remember, in conjunction with these remarks, that
my life has been spent in a crowded city, and the observations and
deductions made are made from contact with brain workers, and
not with mea who earn their living by physical labor.
Please remember also that I do not wish these observations to
apply to dyspeptics, or to men recovering from severe diseases, or
to men who have inherited weak physical constitutions. I wish to
be considered only as remarking on the use of alcohol in the case
of the ordinary brainworker who possesses, by inheritance, a good
physique.
In my judgment alcohol is a poison, and belongs, with the other
valuable poisons, upon the shelf of the druggist, and is to be used
only upon the advice of a good common-sense physician, and to be
discontinued after the emergency has passed for which the physi-

8

114

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

cian prescribed it. To speak chemically, alcohol is a concentrated
hydrocarbon, and needs a great deal of physical labor to dispose
of it in the animal economy. I have noticed that men who are
given to the daily use of alcohol degenerate faster than those who
abstain from its use. They are more liable not only to chronic
degenerations — such as fatty liv^ers, fatty kidneys and the like —
but they are also more liable to be attacked by acute diseases, and
acute diseases are much more likely to prove fatal to the users of
alcohol than to those who do not use it. Take for illustration a
young friend of mine, who commenced the use of alcohol about the
age of twenty-one years. He died after two days illness from suppression of the urine. When I came to examine his body, after
his death, I found that all his internal organs belonged to a man of
the age of seventy years and not to a man of forty, the age at which
he died. I have noticed that steady users of alcohol are very much
more apt to die between the ages of forty and fifty years of some
acute disease than those who do not use it as a beverage.
Of course you understand that I recognize the value of this
article as a drug. Physicians would often be at a loss to know
what to do in certain acute and chronic cases, if they could not give
their patients this article as a medicine. I admit that it is a disputed
point whether alcohol is a food or not. In my opinion, judging
from cases of severe illness which I have carried through, it
does act in the place of food under certain favorable conditions,
but, as you desire to know its effects upon a person who uses it as a.
daily beverage, my object is to only mention such. There is another
point in regard to the use of alcohol which I think is worthy of consideration. This climate of ours is a very stimulating one ; it
develops a great amount of nervous energy, and is in itself a sufficient stimulus for the ordinary individual. Whoever, therefore,
uses alcohol is simply overstimulating his nervous energy.
I have said nothing as yet concerning the danger which every
one undergoes who uses alcohol regularl}^ — the danger of becoming
a chronic and excessive user of the article in question. Of course
you know that any man who uses alcohol to excess destroys his
general morals, and, if he once gets the appetite, there is nothing
on the earth, or above it, or under it, that he will not do in order to
gratify this morbid appetite. He will lie or steal, or see his family
go to the devil with perfect equanimity, provided he can satisfy
this inordinate craving for alcohol.
As regards life insurance, we strive not to accept any one who
exceeds Anstie's limit, which is (as you know) that a man must not
take more than an ounce of pure alcohol in twenty-four hours. We
are particularly averse to accepting any one who has ever overindulged in the use of this article.

LIFE

INSUEANCE

METHODS.

115

Reformed drunkards we avoid for the simple reason given above
— that a man once having yielded to the appetite seldom has the
moral stamina to live a life with even a moderate use of alcohol.
Trusting that the above will satisfactorily cover all that you
desh-e to know concerning the general use of alcohol, I remain
Very truly yours,
Edward W. Lambert, M.D.,
Hon. H. W. Blair.
Medical Director.
The evidence based upon statistics and the business practice of life assurance companies, and by comparison of
abstinent and non-abstinent individuals and associations can
be increased indefinitely ; but further accumulation is useless,
for if the American people believe not what is already
written, neither will they believe though one rise from the
dead.

CHAPTER
ALCOHOL

IN

Vin.
MEDICINE.

Considerations which Influence Physicians to Prescribe it — DiflBculties
tney Encounter — Declai'ations of Noted Medical Bodies — Evidence
that Physicians were the Early Advocates of Moderation — Resolutions
of English Bodies — The Views of Dr. Stille — A Physician who thinks
Alcohol Sometimes Useful, Necessary and Indispensable — The Opinions of Dr. Davis on the other side — His Dissection of the Arguments
for Alcohol — Review of Various Investigations — Letter from Dr.
Hargreaves — Dr. Palmer's Statement of the Case — Varying Opinions
and how they are Sustained — Dr. Rembaugh's Position — Dr. Wilder's
Letter — Important Conclusions.

"I TPON the vexed question, whether alcohol be a medicine
\_J indispensable or useful, I do not propose to enter. It
is enough for the purposes of this case against the 'traffic
in alcohol as a beverage to know that alcohol is not a food,
and that arsenic, prussic acid and strychnine are medicines.
The most powerful poisons are stimulants and narcotics ^ and
alcohol is the worst of them. Scientific investig-ation and the
labors of a learned profession, chastened and restrained in
practice by the growing intelligence of the people, may be
left to settle what shall be classed with materia medica. "We
must know enough to select our food — that at least is the act
of the layman ; but we have a right to rely upon the doctors
for our physic ; that is what they claim to know about, for
which they are responsible, and we, the people, pay — sometimes.
But that physician can hardly claim to be true to his patient
and his profession who follows the routine of practice in the
selection of remedies, who administers a medicinal poison
when a food medicine would be an equally efficacious remedy,
and especially strict should be his caution not to countenance,
save in the direst emergency of his practice, the use of an
agent which, like alcohol, is, in every other situation, the public and private enemy of us all. There is now a rapidlygrowing opinion among many of the ablest and most advanced
116

THE

PHYSICIANS'

POSITION.

117

members of the profession, increasing I think nearly in the
proportion that there has been independent and impartial
personal investigation, that alcohol is never necessary as a
remedy, and that its administration is objectionable generally
on account of the patient, and always by reason of the countenance thus given to this hydra-headed monster. It is also
true that, with hardly a dissenting voice, the verdict of the profession throughout the world is that alcohol is a potent and
dangerous drug, which should be administered or used only
by the direction of a competent medical adviser.
It was not always so. There were hundreds of years when
the practitioners of medicine followed, if they did not form, the
drinking habits of society, and their present position is a great
reform in their own body. AVhen we consider that the still
earlier doctors and chemists concealed the discovery of alcohol for three hundred years on account of the calamities which
they foresaw it would bring upon mankind, if generally known,
it is strange that so many of that same profession since those
infinite calamities have come, and they themselves have so
largely sufiered from them, should be in love with alcohol and
should recommend it to others. It shows the tremendous
power of this king of evil, when, by reason of the clamor of
universal appetite, the warning voice of science and of the
healing art cannot be heard even by its own oracles — like a
person so deaf that he never hears himself speak. It demonstrates also that the pul)lic can have the physic they cry for.
The body of the profession wall give soothing syrup when
people will pay for soothing s^a-up more willingly than for
anything else ; and, until the people are sufficiently intelligent
upon the subject to reject it themselves, the body of the profession will not be at too great sacrifice of personal ease and
the sources of livelihood in fighting the popular demand for
alcohol.
In view of this fact we may well apply to the nation and the
world the admonition, "Physician, heal thyself." Every profession must and ought to have, and in plain words will have,
its bread and butter. It is a question which sometime will be
considered, whether lawyers and physicians should not either
be employed by the public and made pecuniarily independent,
8o that their labors and advice should be directed primarily

118

THE

TEMPEEANCE

MOVEMENT.

to the prevention of the evils which they exist to remedy,
rather than the present system should continue, which makes
it necessary that the evil shall be, in order that they may obtain
a livelihood by its removal. Disease and litigation are the
life of these great professions. If we paid them to be kept
out of trouble, and fined them or compelled them to render
gratuitous service when we are involved in the meshes of the
law or sufier from ill health, or if they were salaried by the
public to give us good laws, keep the peace in civil and criminal affairs, and to save us from sufiering and ill health, we
should at least place self-interest on the side of the public welfare. It has been said that the Czar stops the salary of his
physician when he is not in good health, and that the Chinese
apply this principle to their professors of the healing art.
It is impossible for the patient who is really ill to " medicine "
himself, especially if his be " a mind diseased," or to comprehend the mysteries of his malady. If he could do these things
there would be no occasion for the physician, and his occupation would be gone. But the opinions of those learned in the
science and skilled in the art command our confidence in
cases of doubt, often to a degree beyond that which is felt
by the physician himself. I have therefore arranged in this
chapter a few declarations of great medical bodies and a few
of the many authoritative expressions, specially obtained for
this work, of eminent members of the profession upon the
nature and use of alcohol and its efiect upon the human
system and society^ Without asking for their reasons we
would risk our lives and the lives of our families and friends
upon the professional opinion of any one of these men.
They give us here the same calm and settled truth which
knowledge, experience and observation have taught to them
and upon which they act, and by their advice others act, in
the most solemn afikirs of life and death. It seems to me
that a reasonable people should accept these opinions as conclusive without undertaking to settle nice and, to laymen,
inconsequential and mysterious questions which belong to the
lecture room and the laboratory. While they do not always
agree as to the precise nature of alcohol and differ oftener in
terms than in substance, it ought to be enough that these men
say that alcohol is a dangerous drug, a poison, and that it is one

Rev.

George

C. Haddock^

" The Iowa

Martyr.'''

MEDICAL

DECLARATIONS.

119

of the tools of their occupation which no man outside the faculty
can handle without great risk to body, soul and estate. But
for the gnawing of appetite and the clamor of a great commercial interest this would be sufficient, and I feel great hope
that with multitudes, especially of the young and the, as yet,
unfallen, if not even of those who being in the river are still
this side the rapids, these sententious but emphatic testimonies will be a saving grace.
The first important medical declaration upon alcohol in
recent times was made in 1839 by English physicians and is
as follows. By it those great men, being dead, like our
fathers wdio issued the great declaration for human rights,
yet speak for the emancipation of the race from the worst
tyranny under which mortals ever groaned. They " declared
the opinion to be erroneous that w'ine, beer or spirits was
beneficial to health ; that man in ordinary health required no
such stimulant, and could not be benefited by the habitual
employment of such in either large or small quantities ; and
even in the most moderate doses alcoholic drinks did no
good, while large quantities (such as by many would be
thought moderate) sooner or later prove injurious to the
human constitution without any exception."
This was signed by Sir Benjamin Brodie, Sir James Clark,
Sir J. Eyre, Dr. Marshall Hall, Dr. A. T. Thomson, Dr. A.
Uve, the Queen's physician. Professor Quain, Mr. Bransby
Cooper, and seventy of the most eminent physicians and
surgeons of the United Kins^dom.
In 1847 the second medical declaration was made. This
declaration says: "We are of the opinion: 1st, That a very
large portion of human misery, including poverty, disease,
and crime, is induced by the use of alcoholic or fermented
liquors as a beverage. 2d, That perfect health is compatible
with total abstinence from all such intoxicating drinks, whether
in the form of ardent spirits, or as wine, beer, porter, cider,
etc. 3d, That persons accustomed to such drinks may with
perfect safety discontinue them entirely, or gradually, after a
short time. 4th, That total and universal abstinence from
alcoholic drinks, and intoxicating beverages of all sorts,
would contribute to the health, prosperity, morality and
happiness of the human race."

Sir Benjamin Brodie, Sir G.

120

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Clark, Sir W. Burnett, Sir J. Forbes, Sir H. Holland, Sir A.
Monroe, Sir J. M'Gregor, Sir R. Christison, Dr. W. B.
Carpenter, Dr. Copland, Dr. Neil Arnott, Dr. A. Farre,.
Professors Guy, Allen, Thomson, Miller, McLeod, Thompson, and Simpson, and 2000 of the leading professors and
practitioners of Great Britain made this declaration.
This it will be observed is a declaration in favor of total and
universal abstinence from alcoholic drinks and intoxicating beverages ofall sorts. It in factcovers the whole case^ith that calm
but comprehensive power of expression which characterizesthe utterances of medical bodies. They do not even say that
alcohol is important as a medicine. They in effect declare
emphatically against it as a food, for if a food the fourth paragraph never could be predicated as true.
The Third Medical Declaration of Great Britain was made
in 1871.
It reads as follows :
As it is beheved that the inconsiderate prescription of large quantities of alcoholic liquids by medical men for their patients ha&
given rise, in many instances, to the formation of intemperate
habits, the undersigned, while unable to abandon the use of alcohol
in the treatment of certain diseases, are yet of the opinion that no'
medical practitioner should prescribe it without a sense of grave
responsibility. They believe that alcohol, in whatever form, should
be prescribed with as much care as any powerful drug, and that the
direction for its use should be so framed as not to be interpreted asa sanction for excess, or necessarily for the continuance of its use
when the occasion is past.
They are also of opinion that many people immensely exaggerate
the value of alcohol as an article of diet, and since no class of men
see so much of its ill effects, and possess such power to restrain it&
abuse, as members of their own profession, they liold that every
medical practitioner is bound to exert liis utmost influence to inculcate habits of great moderation in the use of alcoholic liquids.
Being also firmly convinced that the great amount of drinking of
alcoholic liquors among the working classes of this country is one
of the greatest evils of the day, destroying, more than anything else,
the health, happiness, and welfare of those classes, and neutralizing
to a large extent the great industrial prosperity which Providence
has placed within the reach of this nation, the undersigned would
gladly support any wise legislation which would tend to restrict
within proper limits the use of alcoholic beverages, and gradually
introduce habits of temperance.
Signed by George Burrows, M. D.,

THE

MONTREAL

MEDICAL

DECLARATION.

121

F. R. S., President of the Royal College of Physicians, etc.,
George Busk, F. R. S., President of the Royal College of Surgeons ;
Professor Parkes and 189 of the leading physicians and surgeons
of London, and 69 medical practitioners, heads of medical institutions in the various cities and towns of England.
This address is evidently forced out of men by a sense of
responsibility in the presence of great evils fortified in the
habits of society, which they are influenced to attack with some
lack of emphatic directness, but which constrain to such degree of condemnation as they feel the people will bear. The
profession was less outspoken in 1871 than in 1847. The
drinking habit of England as well as America was strons^er
then than in 1847. If in the days of their ignorance God
winked at the sins of his children, we cannot wonder that we
have to read between the lines for the same real denunciation
of the traiEc which we find in the open approval of total abstinence in the earlier and better day of 1847. In fiict, if the
profession of our time would go back to the old Arabian, Albucassis, who knew in advance that his invention, if it got
abroad, would be an unmitigated curse, and therefore concealed it,they would call a spade a spade. The prudent doctor is careful what he says of the origin of the gouty toe —
especially when he has the gout also himself.
In 1873, the leading members of the medical faculty of Canada resident in Montreal, comprising G. W. Campbell, M. D.,
Prof, of Principles and Practice of Surgery, and Dean of Faculty of McGill College ; E. H. Trudel, M. D., Prof, of Midwifery, and 25 professors in Medical Colleges, etc., and seventy
other physicians of ]Monti'eal, united in a declaration considerably shorter than that of 1871, just mentioned, and also considerably stronger against alcohol. It is nearly up to the
standard of 1847, and reads as follows :
February, 1873.
We the undersigned, members of the medical profession in Montreal, are of opinion — 1st, That a large proportion of human misery,
poverty, disease, and crime, is produced by the use of alcoholic
liquors as a beverage. 2d, That total abstinence from intoxicating liquors, whether fermented or distilled, is consistent with, and
conducive to, the highest degree of physical and mental health and
vigor. 3d, That abstinence from intoxicating liquors would greatly
promote the health, morality and happiness of the people.

122

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

I will now insert the following International Declaration,
which was made appropriately at Philadelphia on America
soil. The International Medical Confess, the hio;hest medical body in the world, held its session at Philadelphia, in
September, 1876, and I find the following in the ofiicial report
of its proceedings on the 16th of that month :
The following is the report, from the section on medicine,
on the paper of Dr. E. M. Hunt, on "Alcohol in its therapeutic relations as a food and a medicine."
First — Alcohol is not shown to have a definite food value by any
of the usual methods of chemical analysis or physiological investigation.
Second — Its use as a medicine is chiefly as a cardiac (relating to
the heart) stimulant, and often admits of substitution.
Third — As a medicine it is not well fitted for self-prescription by
the laity, and the medical profession is not accountable for such
administration or for the enormous evils resulting therefrom.
Fourth — The purity of alcoholic liquors is in general not as well
assured as that of articles used for medicine should be. The various
mixtures when used as medicine should have definite and known
composition, and should not be interchanged promiscuously.
Please note that this supreme authority says that alcohol is
not known to have food value and that its principal use as a
medicine is to stimulate the hearty not to create power by
nutrition, but to use up the capital of the body with unnatural
rapidity, and even for this purpose something else might generally be substituted.
Has there been any proof discovered since that time that
alcohol is a food? On the contrary, all the increased light
which comes streaming in upon us from every direction is
to the effect that it is not even a medicine, save only as any
other virulent poison may be a medicine — certainly not an
indispensable one, and doing on the aggregate vastly more
hurt than good by the admission of all.
We liave also the Medical Declaration of New York, Brooklyn and vicinity, which is one of the briefest and best ever
issued :
1. In view of the alarming prevalence and ill effects of intemperance, with wliich none are so familiar as members of the medical
profession, and which have called forth from eminent English phy-

THE

NEAV

YORK

MEDICAL

DECLARATION.

123

sicians the voice of warning to tlie people of Great Britain concerning tlie use of alcoholic beverages, we, the undersigned,
members of the medical profession of New York and vicinity, unite
in the declaration that we believe alcohol should be classed with
other powerful drugs ; that when prescribed medicinally it should
be with conscientious caution and a sense of grave responsibility.
2. We are of opinion that the use of alcoholic liquor as a beverage is productive of a large amount of physicial disease ; that it
entails diseased appetites upon offspring ; and that it is the cause of
a large percentage of the crime and pauperism of our cities and
country.
3. We would welcome any judicious aud effective legislation —
state and national — which should seek to confine the traffic in alcohol to the legitimate purposes of medical and other sciences, art and
mechanism.
This i.s signed by Edward Deliifieid, M. D., president College of Physicians and Surgeons, and of Roosevelt Hospital ;
Willarcl Parker, M. D., ex-president Academy of Medicine;
A. Clark, M.D., professor College of Physicians and Surgeons
and senior physician Bellevue Hospital ; James Anderson,
M. D. , No. 30 University place, ex-president Academy of Medicine and president Phj^sicians' ]\lutual Aid Association ; E. R.
Peaslee, M. D., ex-president Academy of Medicine, New
York; C. R. Agnew, M.D., ex-president Medical Society ot
the State of New York; Stephen Smith, M. D., surgeon
Bellevue Hospital, commissioner of health, and president
American Health Association ; Alfred C. Post, M. D., LL. D.,
professor of surgery in University Medical College and expresident New York Academy of Medicine ; E. D. Hudson,
Jr., M. D., professor of Theoiy and Practice of Medicine,
Woman's ^Medical College of New York Infirmary ; Erasmus
D. Hudson, M. D., ph^'-sician and surgeon; Elisha Harris,
M. D., secretary American Public Health Association, late sanitary superintendent ]Metropolitan Board of Health, and corresponding secretary Prison Association of N. York ; Ellsworth
Eliot, M. D., president of the New York County Medical
Society; Stephen Rogers, M. D., president of the MedicoLegal Society of New York ; Andrew H. Smith, M.D., visitmg physician to St. Luke's Hospital, etc. ; J. E. Janvrin,
M. D., Verranus Morse, M.D., Brooklyn ; E. T. Richardson,
M. D., Brooklyn ; William H. Hall, M. D., Walter R. Gil-

124

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

lette, M. D., physician to Charity Hospital, lecturer University
Medical College; J. R. Learning, M. D., physician to St.
Luke's Hospital, president University Alumni Association^
emeritus professor of medicine, etc. ; James O. Pond, M. D.,
treasurer New York Academy of Medicine ; Theodore L.
Mason, M.D., consulting surgeon Kings County Inebriates''
Home, consulting surgeon Long Island College Hospital, etc.,
and president Collegiate Department; G. J. Fisher, M. D..
late vice-president New York State Medical Society, late
president Westchester County Medical Society, and one hundred others of like character and standing.
In reply to personal letters addressed by me to some of the
most eminent physicians of our time, I have received answers
from several, which I think will be of great value and of influence with those who desire the latest and highest knowledge
upon the subject of this work. I insert these letters, or such
extracts as are consistent with my space, not with the purpose
of commenting upon, supporting or controverting the views
of the writers — for none but a fool would undertake to chatter
among the gods unless he were one of them — but as presenting, Ithink, all sides of the subject with great force.
I suppose no one will question that Dr. Alfred Stille is
among the ablest men living in his own or any profession ; and
equally eminent among those who entertain liberal sentiments
in regard to the value of alcohol in medicine, and the folly, if
not wrong, of restricting "personal liberty" in its use by the
forces of society. As such a presentation of that side of the
question as would be expected from so eminent an authority
I insert the following letter in full.
I may, however, say that it is the only letter received by
me which takes similar ground, and also that it will be observed
that Dr. Stille finds it necessary to abolish the distinction,
between food and poison in order to maintain his argument,
and to hold that "nothing is intrinsically poisonous." I am
sure that the impression is very general among plain people
that there is intrinsically a distinction between foods and
poisons. We all comprehend that to eat tenfold of the usual
amount necessary of wholesome meat, highly seasoned with
spices and condiments to make it palatable, would be gluttony ;but I am sure that no preparation or quantity of arsenic

DR. stille's opinion.

125

or strychnine or even opium, however large or small, would
ever be considered by the people as food, although it might
be a very good medicine. Food is necessary when we are
perfectly well ; no medicine is good for a person who is perfectly well ; at least prussic acid, although a medicine, has not
generally been thought to be "intrinsically," even in the
most limited quantities, a food for persons in health.
It is difficult to comprehend how, without a license in the
use of words which confounds all forms of expression and the
ideas behind them, there can be food or nutrition in arsenic
or paris green. But those who find comfort in these views of
Dr. Stille will have occasion to economize the whole of, it or,
after they have read his picture of the generality and extent
of the abuse of alcohol, and his method of disposing of those
who thus trespass upon natural laws and the welfare of society,
they will close their account with scant satisfaction.
It may further be observed that Dr. Stille also reasons
upon the common assumption that the unnatural and acquired
appetite for alcohol is instinctive and ineradicable like the
indispensable natural passions and religious impulses. Again,
Power instinctively enslaves, and slavery of the weak to the
strong was once universal. Was its abolition, therefore,
wrono- ?
The question, whether society ought not for the general
good to prohibit the making and use as a mere beverage of
that for which there are so many innocent substitutes, presses
upon the mind with great force after reading this strong letter.
No man ought to be permitted to exercise a non-essential
privilege — to drink that which is not necessary for his own
health — when his example destroys so many others. If he
may, then, without necessity or benefit to himself, he may
destroy others. This is a moral, and might well be made a
legal wrong. It is conceded that he may drink alcohol for
disease, for that is medicinal use.
3900 Sprnce Street,
)
Philadelphia, June 27, 1887. \
My Dear Sir :— I had to-day the honor of receivhig from you a
letter in which you request my opinion upon the following points :
1. Whether alcohol is a poison or a food?

126

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

2. Under what circumstances, if any, it is useful, or necessary,
or indispensable, as a drink or a medicine?
3. Tlie discussion in regard to alcoliol must naturally turn upon
the attitude of your (the medical) profession towards it.
I beg to state that I have discussed these questions as completely
as I was able in two of my works, viz.: '* Therapeutics" and
Materia Medica, 4th ed., 1874, vol. ii., p. 710 and p. 723, under
the titles of ' ' Wine and Alcohol " ; and also in the National Dispensatory, 4th ed., 1886, under corresponding titles. In these papers
copious illustrations and references may be found.
To answer specifically your questions, I would say :
1. Alcohol is food. Like any other food it may become injurious
to life and sometimes a poison. Nothing is intrinsically poisonous.
The substances reckoned as poisons become so only when unduly
taken — i. e. , in regard to the dose and the individual. Many poisons
are precious medicines. Tlie most wholesome foods used in excess
may become a directly fatal poison, or by such habitual use bring
on disease and death.
2. The circumstances that render alcohol useful, necessary or
indispensable as a medicine are numberless and can only be
described in a medical treatise, as I have attempted to do in the
volumes referred to. I will only add in direct reply to your inquiry
that alcohol is often useful, and sometimes not only necessary but
indispensable, in the treatment of disease. I do not believe that it
possesses these qualities as a drink — by which I understand a
habitual beverage — because it is notorious that a great many persons
enjoy good health, and notably women and children, without using
alcohol as a drink. But such facts do not conclude against the use
of alcohol by adult men, even as " a drink." They have no more
weight than the argument against the use of flesh-food, drawn
from the fact that the Buddhists, who equal in number all the Christians in the world, live on vegetable food and milk alone. Or, to
take a more directly pertinent illustration, no more weight than that
most decaying race in the old world, the Mohammedan, is the only
one whose religion interdicts the use of alcoholic drinks. The use
of alcohol is universal, and must, therefore, be instinctive. There
is not a nation nor a tribe, however barbarous, that has not made
use of alcohol in some form ; and even the Arabs, who are now, in
common with all Mohammedans, forbidden its use, were the first to
distil alcohol and introduce it into Europe. The argument extra
abuse is an old fallacy. It is not logical to condemn or banish alcohol because it may be admitted to give rise to more sin and crime
than any other single cause in times of peace. But this and kindred
facts do not palliate the fanaticism that substitutes molasses and

Rodney

C. Gambrell,

The Alississippi Martyr.

DR.

DAVIS

ON

THE

OTHER

SIDE.

127

water for wine in the Lord's Supper, or the ignorance that advocates
the use of such wine only as is free from alcohol when it is certain
that wine cannot exist without alcohol. The argument so misused
would justify universal celibacy by the misery, immediate and
entailed, of unhappy marriages ; would justify absolute non-intercourse between the sexes because diseases, degradation and crime
are entailed by certain conditions of that intercourse ; would even
proscribe religion, because, far beyond all other courses, it has been
the origin or the parent of the bloodiest and most destructive wars
that ever desolated maukiud, and arrested the growth of civilization.
To counteract an evil by excess, the best way is not, and ought
not to be, to inflict punishment on the innocent, but to prevent the
existence, or repress the growth, of the evil by punishing those who
are guilty of it. It is in vain to preach temperance when at every
corner is established a legalized temptation to debauchery. It is
almost as vain to press moral or religious advice upon intemperate
men and women who are not only a burden and a plague, but a perpetual corruption, to the community. In my opinion such pestilent
persons should, by due process of law well guarded from abuse, be
deprived of their citizenship and made incapable of performing any
valid legal act.
The medical profession, above all other classes of society, has an
opportunity to observe and deplore the consequences of alcoholic
as well as of other forms of intemperance. But, as medicine is a
free science and art, and is not hedged in by dogmas as theologians
are, nor controlled by judicial precedents as lawyers are, a precise
accord among physicians is not to be expected either in scientific
opinions as to the nature and causes of intemperance, or in regard
to the practical measures fitted to mitigate its evils. And, if this be
true of the wisest and most judicious among them, how much truer
must it be of those who have more zeal than knowledge or discretion. Where the latter would override every obstacle in the direct
road to their goal, the former are more apt to regard ethical and
social questions in the light of experience as well as science ; and
while inculcating temperance in all things they do not, as a body,
either disapprove of the use of alcohol as a medicine or regard its
use as physiologicalW an error.
I have the honor to be, very respectfully,
Your obedient servant,
Hon. Henry W. Blair,
Alfred Stille.
U. S. Senate, Washington.
The name

of N.

S. Davis,

M. D., LL. D., Professor of

128

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Practical and Clinical Medicine in the Chicago Medical
College, Medical Department of Northwestern University,
the "Father of the American Medical Association," is well
known on both continents, not only for his great learning, experience and skill in his profession generally, but
for the special attention lie has given, during the last halfcentury, to the investigation of the very question under discussion. Itis not necessary to demonstrate the truth more
than once, and one witness to a fact is as good as many. But
he must be a good witness ; he must know and we must
believe. Dr. Davis is one of many who have demonstrated
that in all the exigences of wide practice alcohol is now needless. Once it may have been different, but the numerous discoveries ofother equally efficacious and comparatively harmless remedies has now made it easy to dispense with alcohol
even as a medicine. It can still be used as such, but it is no
longer necessary. If not necessary even as a medicine, certainly as a beverage, a luxury, it should be destroyed. Again
it should be remembered that the science of medicine is one
of vast ramifications. In every one of many specialties there
is room for the constant and life-lono; exercise of the o-reatest abilities, and Dr. Davis has directed his, largely, to
the investigation and settlement of the all-important questions
growing out of the relations of alcohol to humanity.
Chicago, Ili.., 65 Eandolph, St., )
July 30, 1887.
f
Dear Sir : — In reply to your inquiries I inclose for you a brief
printed paper written by me not long since, because it will give you a
much clearer expression of my views in regard to the effects of alcoholic
liquors in the human system and their true relations to the treatment
of diseases than I could possibly embrace in a single letter. I have
been constantly engaged in the practice of medicine a little more than
fifty years, embracing both private and public hospital practice, and
have demonstrated by the last forty years of actual experience that no
form of alcoholic drink, either fermented or distilled, is necessary or
desirable for internal use in either health or in any of the varied forms
of disease ; but that health can be better preserved and disease be
more successfully treated without any use of such drinks. With much
respect,
Yours truly,
Hon. Henrt. W. Blair.
N. S. Davis.
U. S. Senate, Washington.

DR. DAVIS'

ARGUMENT.

129

The following is the paper referred to by Dr. Davis :
By alcoholic liquors in the following paper is meant all the varieties
of fermented and distilled preparations containing alcohol, such as beer,
ale, porter, wine, whisky, brandy, rum, gin, etc. ; and my principal
object is to give an intelligible answer to the often-repeated inquiry
whether any one or all of these articles are really necessary for use in
the practice of medicine where the paramount objects are to prevent,
to palliate, or to cure, disease in the safest and most expeditious manner. To do this properly three preliminary questions must be considered, and, if possible, settled on a basis of well-ascertained facts :
1. Do any of these liquids contain ingredients of value to the sick,
besides the alcohol they contain, that cannot be furnished just as well
from other sources ?
2. in
"What
are and
the disease
appreciable
effects of alcohol on the human system
both
health
?
3. What are the conditions in sickness that it is calculated to remove ?
Every one who has given careful attention to the subject will
promptly answer the first question in the negative.
That the different varieties of beer and other fermented drinks contain a small amount of fajcula or modified starch, sugar and a little
saline matter capable of being appropriated as nourishment is true ;
but the quantity is so small that it is practically useless.
The careful and repeated analyses of different varieties of beer made
by Liebig, Playfair, Hassels, and others, show that it would require
the drinking of more than six barrels of beer to get enough of the
nutritive materials just named to make the equivalent of one ordinary
loaf of bread. Hence no well-informed person would think of using
those drinks to obtain fcecula, sugar or saline matters when the same
materials could be obtained so much more readily and cheaply from
other sources. The same remark is equally applicable to the active
principle of hops in beer, and that of juniper in gin. An infusion or
tea prepared from one pennyAvorth of either would exert more influence than could be obtained from the same ingredients as they exist in
a gallon of beer or a quart of gin. We may repeat, therefore, with
emphasis, that there are no elements in any of the fermented and distilled liquors in sufficient quantity to be of the slightest value, either
as nourishment or medicine, except the alcohol and water. So true is
this that one Avould search the world over in vain to find any one using
a specimen of fermented or distilled liquid after the alcohol generated
by the fermentation had been separated from it.
Assuming it to be a fact that it is the alcohol in all these liquids,
and that alone, which is capable of exerting any important influence
9

130

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

upon the human system, I shall proceed to answer the second question
— namely, What are the appreciable effects of alcohol on the human
system both in health and disease? Having made this question one of
special study and observation for more than forty years, I could easily
fill a moderate-sized volume with the details of experiments, clinical
observations and facts bearing upon the subject and affording an
ample basis for the conclusions I shall briefly state in this paper. I
well remember when, in accordance with the simple and fascinating
chemico-physiological doctrines of Liebig and his school, alcoholic
liquors were classed with the hydro-carbons as "respiratory food," and
almost universally regarded as capable of increasing the temperature
of the human body, and of stimulating all its functions. But when the
investigations of Drs. Prout, of London, Sandras and Bouchardet, of
France, and Boker, of Germany, confirmed by many others, had
fully established the fact that during the presence of alcohol in the
system the elimination of carbonic-acid gas from the lungs was diminished, together with a general diminution of waste matter from all the
excretory organs, the idea of combustion or " respiratory food " had to
be abandoned. This abandonment of the stimulating and heat-producing qualities of alcoholic drinks was rendered more complete when,
in 1850, the ^^Titer of this paper proved by a carefully-executed series
of experiments, in which the direct application of the thermometer was
made to the subject operated on, that the presence of alcohol actually
reduced the temperature of the body, and lessened the action of all the
smaller blood-vessels by lessening the sensibility of the vaso-motor
nerves.
These results have since been fully established by the experimental
investigations of Drs. B. W. Richardson and Anstie, of England, and
Dr. Hammond, myself and others in this country. But no sooner had
the most carefully-conducted scientific investigations proved the entire
fallacy of the doctrine, that alcohol was capable of stimulating or
increasing the functions and temperature of the human body, than the
advocates of its use reversed the grounds on which such advocacy was
based. Accepting the well-established fact that the presence of alcohol
in the system directly diminishes both the molecular changes and nerve
sensibility, thereby retarding tissue changes, they claim that such
retardation of molecular changes and excretory eliminations, by retarding the waste, was equivalent to the same amount of supply, and consequently that alcoholic drinks were " indirect food." As stated by
Dr. Hammond, if the presence of alcohol, taken in the form of alcoholic
drinks, lessened the sum total of eliminations from the human body
to the extent of half a pound in twenty-four hours, it was equivalent
in value to half a pound of food taken. This idea, thus originating
with men of kno^vn scientific reputation, rapidly became popular, and

DR.

DAYIS'

AEGUMENT.

131

again furnished all classes with a plausible reason for taking whatever
alcoholic beverage their taste or fancy might dictate. But a critical
examination will show that this position rests on no better foundation
than the preceding one of combustion and increased heat. That the
presence of alcohol in the system actually retards molecular changes,
and consequently diminishes the aggregate amount of waste in a given
time, is a well-established fact ; but the inference drawn from this that
such diminution of waste is equivalent to the addition of an equal
amount of new matter through the processes of digestion and assimilation is entirely fallacious.
Those who have drawn this inference have apparently forgotten two
of the most important physiological laws relating to animal life — namely, first, that all the active phenomena of life depend upon, and directly
involve, molecular changes, and consequently necessitate both waste
and supply ; second, that every cell or organized atom of living animal
matter has only a limited duration of integrity or life, at the end of
which it must either undergo a natural disintegration into waste matter, or degenerate into an unhealthy and lower type of organization.
Therefore, whatever retards the natural molecular changes in livin"
tissues retards or lessens the phenomena of life, as seen in the diminution of secretion, excretion, temperature, and nerve sensibility ; and
by retaining cells and organized atoms beyond the natural limit of time
directly promotes their degeneration into materials of a useless or positively injurious character, as when nervous, muscular or secretory
structure changes into atheromatous, fatty, caseous, or septic materials,
instead of undergoing natural dissolution and excretion as waste matter. Hence, the prevention of a certain amount of waste of livina;
structure in a given time is in no proper sense physiologically equivalent to the addition of an equal amount of new material by nutrition
in the same time. On the contrary, both experiments and common
observations show that whenever such mental or physical exercise is
continued as naturally increases tissue changes and waste, and these
are retarded or prevented by the presence of some agent capable of
exerting such an influence, derangements of structure or function invariably follow. Assuming the foregoing statements to be correct, it is not
difiicult to understand the important effects of alcohol upon the structures and functions of the human body. Taken into the stomacli
diluted with water, as in all the varieties of the fermented and distilled
drinks, it is rapidly absorbed, and enters into the blood unchanged,
and circulates with it through all the organized structures of the body.
This has been proved by a large number of analytical examinations^
and the proof may be repeated at any time by applying the proper
tests to the blood or tissues in from one to three hours after the alcoholic drink has been swallowed.

While it is thus present in the blood„

132

THE

TEMPJERANCE

MOVEMENT.

circulating in contact with all the tissues of the body, its strong affinity
for the albuminous constituents they contain causes it to hold the natural molecular changes in check, and thereby retard the formation of the
products of those changes, as seen in the diminution of temperature and
the quantity of eliminations. It is not the eliminations alone that are
diminished by this interference with the natural affinities of the blood,
but the taking up of the oxygen from the air-cells of the lungs is retarded in equal ratio with the lessening of the amount of waste carbonic
acid gas liberated, thereby diminishing the necessary change from
venous to arterial blood.
When the amount of the alcohol taken is small, but regularly
repeated, as in the daily use of beer and wine, the diminished supply
of oxygen to the tissues, coupled with the moderate retardation of
waste, encourages the accumulation of un oxidated materials in the
foi'm of inert fat. This causes increased weight and bulk with corresponding decrease of activity and power of endurance, and if continued until past the middle period of life ends in fatty degenerations
in the coats of the vessels of the brain, in the heart, the liver, or the
kidneys, by which the natural duration of life is shortened by ten or
fifteen years. When the quantity taken is greater and more concentrated, as in the free use of whisky, brandy, etc., not only are the
molecular changes more actively retai'ded, leading to more rapid tissue
degenerations, but the functions of the stomach and brain are so
actively interfered with as to prevent healthy nutrition, and often
induce either chronic inflammations or delirium tremens, or both.
Another important effect of alcohol while present in the blood is the
direct diminution of sensibility in the brain and nervous structures of
the body. It is this ansBsthetic effect upon the cerebral and nervous
structures that induces all the series of changes in the individual from
simple don't-care-ativeness and unrestrained hilarity to stupor or
dead-drunkenness, which chiefly occupies the attention of the public.
It is in no sense a stimulant or tonic, either at the beginning, middle
or end of its effects, as is generally supposed, but exerts a direct sedative effect upon nerve sensibility, by which the mind becomes less conscious of outward impressions of any kind, whether of heat, cold,
weariness, weakness or pain, and in like ratio less capable of exercising self-control, or manifesting the usual sense of propriety.
Finally, the alcohol, having entered the blood from the stomach
unchanged, is incapable of assimilation or appropriation to the tissues
of the body as nutritive material, and is separated from the blood
and eliminated as foreign matter through the lungs, skin, kidneys, and
other excretory organs, as fully proved by the experiments of Lallemand, Perrin and Duroy, Richardson, Hammond, Anstie, and many
others.
It is true that the two last-named experimenters claim that

VAEIOUS

STDIUXiANTS.

133

all the alcohol taken is not again excreted without change, but that an
adult individual is capable of retaining iu some way a small quantity,
averaging, according to Dr. Anstie, from four hundred to six hundred
grains of alcohol in the twenty-four hours. This small quantity,
equal only to about one ounce, was supposed by these gentlemen to be
used up in the generation of some kind of force, but what kind of
force remains a mystery. The truth is that the loss of such an
amount of alcohol from a given quantity circulating with the blood
during twenty-four hours is no more than might be held in mere
mechanical union with the albuminous constituents of the tissues, for
which it has a strong affinity ; and the only force it develops is the
catalytic force of inertia, by which it holds in check those natural
molecular changes that would take place were it not present. Without
further explanations, the effects of alcohol upon the human system
may be clearly stated in the following brief paragraphs :
1. It is absorbed from the stomach, and ciiTulates with the blood,
and is finally eliminated through the excretory organs as a foreign
agent incapable of either digestion or assimilation.
2. While present in the blood it acts directly as an anassthetic,
diminishing the sensibility and force of both the cerebro-spinal and
vaso-motor nervous centers ; and as an organic sedative, diminishing
molecular changes in the tissues and excretory organs, lessening the
evolution of heat, and remotely favoring tissue degenerations and
accumulations of waste material in the system.
This leads us to the third and last question proposed at the commencement ofthis paper — namely. What are the conditions in sickness that alcoholic liquids are calculated to remove?
In the foregoing brief review it has been shown that alcohol acts
upon the human system as an anassthetic, organic sedative and antipyretic, and a skillful physician may use it in any case of disease
where either or all these effects are needed, provided he cannot have
at hand any other agent or agents with which he can accomplish the
same purposes more promptly and with less danger of any collateral
injury to his patient. This proviso, however, if honestly attended to,
will practically exclude alcohol from the list of ordinary remedial
agents.
As an anaesthetic and anodyne, all will agree that it is far inferior
to, and less manageable than, ether, chloroform, nitrous oxide, and
the ordinary narcotics.
As an organic sedative and anti-pyretic it is so much less prompt and
efficient in its action than either water applied externally or the internal use of quinine, salicylic acid, digitalis, and a score of other articles,
that no well-informed practitioner would think of selecting it for these
purposes.
Really, at the present time, there are but two pretenses, or

134

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

supposed morbid conditions, for which alcoholic remedies are prescribed by the enlighted part of the profession. One of these is
that popularly prevalent condition of exhaustion or impairment from
overwork, mental or physical, or from excessive drains by nursing or
unnatural discharges.
It is in this large class of half-invalids that the moderate daily use
of beer, ale, wine, and occasionally stronger alcoholic drinks is prescribed, on the plea that their power to retard the waste tissues is
conservative and equivalent to the addition of new matter by assimilation, the utter fallacy of which we have already indicated with
sufficient clearness.
The other morbid condition for which these agents are very generally
prescribed is that weakness of the heart sometimes met with in low
forms of fever and in the advanced stage of other acute diseases.
It is claimed that alcohol is capable of strengthening and sustaining
the action of the heart under the circumstances just named, and also
under the first depressing influence of severe shock.
There is nothing in the ascertained physiological action of alcohol
on the human system, as developed by a wide range of experimental
investigation, to sustain this claim. Indeed, it is difficult to conceive
how it is possible that an agent which so plainly and directly diminishes
nerve sensibility and voluntary muscular action can at the same time
act as a cordial or heart-tonic. I have used the sphygmograph and
every other available means for testing experimentally the effects of
alcohol upon the action of the heart and blood-vessels generally, but
have failed in every instance to get proof of any increased force of
cardiac action.
The first and very transient effect is generally increased frequency
of beat, followed immediately by dilatation of the peripheral vessels
from impaired vaso-motor sensibility and the same unsteady or wavy
sphygmographic tracing as is given in typhoid fever, and which is usually regarded as evidence of cardiac debility. Sometimes when the doses
of alcohol are increased to the extent of decided anaesthesia the heart
acts slower and the arteries have more volume from the increased obstruction to the movement of the blood through the capillaries and
smaller vessels, and the diminished oxygenation and decarbonization
of the blood in the lungs. Turning from the field of experimentation
to the sick-room, my search for evidences of the power of alcohol to
sustain the force of the heart or in any way to strengthen the patient
has been equally unsuccessful. I was educated and entered upon the
practice of medicine at a time when alcoholic drinks were universally
regarded as stimulating and heat-producing in their influence on the
human system, and commenced their use without prejudice or preconceived notions. But the first ten years of direct clinical or practical

ALCOHOLIC

REMEDIES

A CONCESSION

TO PEEJUDICE.

135

observation satisfied me fully of the incorrectness of those views, and
very nearly banished the use of these agents from my list of remedies.
And while it is true that during the last thirty years I have not prescribed for internal use the aggregate amount of one quart of any
kind of fermented or distilled drinks, either in private or hospital practice, yet I have continued to have abundant opportunities for observing the effects of these agents as given by others with whom I have
been in council ; and simple truth compels me to say that I have never
yet seen a case in which the use of alcoholic drinks either increased the
force of the heart's action or strengthened the patient beyond the first
thirty m,inutes after it was swallowed.
But I could detail very many cases in which the free administration
of alcoholic remedies was quieting the patient's restlessness, enfeebling
the capillary and peripheral circulation, and steadily favoring increased passive or hypostatic engorgements of the lungs and other internal
viscera, and thereby hastening a fatal result, where both attending
physicians and friends thought they were the only agents that were
keeping the patient alive. Yet, persuading the abandonment of their
use and the substitution of simple nourishment, aided by such nerveexcitants as tea, coffee, carbonate of ammonia, camphor, strychnia,
etc., judiciously administered, instead of further prostration or sinking
in consequence of such withdrawal, there has generally been a slow but
steady improvement in all cases where improvement was possible, and
in no case has it been found necessary or advisable to return to the
use of the alcoholic articles after they had been abandoned. If I'am
asked why, tender such a statement of facts, the profession continues to
prescribe these drinks, I ansiuer, simply from the force of hahit and
traditional education, coupled with a reluctance to risk the experiment
of omitting them while the general popular notions sanction their tise.
Nothing is easier than self-deception in this matter. A patient is suddenly taken with syncope, or nervous weakness, from Avhich abundant
experience has shoAvn that a speedy recovery would take place by simple rest and fresh air. But in the alarm of patients and friends something must be done. A little wine or brandy is given, and, as it is not
sufTcient to positively prevent, the patient in due time revives just as
would have been the case if neither mne nor brandy had been used.
Of course both doctor and friends will regard the so-called stimulant as the cause of the recovery. So, too, when patients are getting weak, in the advanced stage of fever or some other self-limited
disease, an abundance of nourishment is regularly administered, in the
greater part of which is mixed some kind of alcoholic drink. The
latter will always occupy the chief attention, and if, after a severe run,
the fever or disease finally disappears it will be said that the patient
was sustained or " kept alive " for over two or three weeks, as the case

136

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

may be, " solely by the stimulants," when, in fact, if the same nourishment and care had been given without a drop of alcohol he would have
convalesced sooner and more perfectly, as I have seen demonstrated a
thousand times during the last thirty years. Indeed, if any one will
take the trouble to examine and analyze carefully the records of the
large general hospitals of both Europe and America, for the Jast half
century, I venture the statement that the ratio of mortality from general
fevers and acute diseases will be found to have increased, pari passu,
with the increase in the quantity of alcoholic drinks consumed in their
treatment. A similar examination of the vital statistics of different
nations and communities will show a close relation between the relative
mortality from consumption, scrofula, apoplexy, paralysis, and hepatic,
cardiac and renal dropsies and the amount of alcoholic drinks consumed by the people.

I believe there is no better authority in any country upon
the subject of alcoholism than Dr. William Hargreaves of
Philadelphia. There is no branch of it with which he is not
become familiar by long and profound investigation, while
his conservative and conscientious character joined with
experience in his profession both in war and peace, unite to
give weight to his opinions. His great works, "Alcohol
and Man" and "Alcohol and Science," are two vast arsenals
furnished with every weapon for the destruction of the liquor
traffic.
I insert his entire communication.
Philadelphia, Pa., July 16, 1887.
Respected Sir :— Yours of June 25th was duly received, asking my
opinion, Whether on man alcohol was a poison or a food? and under
what circumstances, if any, is it useful, necessary or indispensable ?
For more than fifty years, as boy, man, medical student, and
medical practitioner of over twenty-five years, I have read, investigated
and endeavored to obtain by observation, experiments and other means
all the knowledge obtainable of the nature and effects of alcohol.
My own views of the subject, and others, are given in a limited
extent in my two works, " Alcohol and Science " and " Alcohol and
Man," but I will answer your questions as concisely as I can, and
refer you to the above-named books for a more extended and particular
account of the Nature and Effects of Alcohol upon the human body and
mind.
Hoping the inclosed statement and opinions will be of service to you
and the cause of Truth, Science and Humanity, believe me
Your very obedient servant,
Hon. Henry W. Blaik,
Wm. Hargreaves, M. DU. S. Senate, Washington, D. C.

m

p

Hon. Albert Griffin,
Chairman Anti-Saloon Republican National Committee.

DR. HARGEEAVES'

VIEWS

ON

ALCOHOL.

137

Alcohol, by the universal judgment and consent of all toxicologists,
has been classed as a poison — an acrid, narcotic poison.
The experiments and observations of Fontaine, Courten, Lonzoni,
Baglivi, Viborg, Metschelich, Jacobi, Falck, Percy and others of
Europe ; Hammond and others of America, have shown that alcohol
is a poison to all the lower animals.
Poisoning may differ in degree, according to the strength of the
poison or the power of the organism to resist its toxical effects.
That alcoholic liquors are poisons is confirmed by common and
universal language ; as the literal meaning of the term used to describe
the condition of a person under the influence of alcohol, viz., intoxicated— is poisoned, and is limited in the English language to poisons
acting on the nervous system. That alcohol is a poison in large doses
is rendered plain by its action on the human body ; for Avhen introduced into the stomach in sufficient quantity, either in its pure state,
or diluted, as rum, gin, whisky, brandy, etc., its effects are fatal.
Indeed no scientist will say it is not a poison in large doses. (See
" Alcohol and Science" — Alcohol a Poison.) It is very illogical to
suppose that a substance which in large quantity Avill destroy life
becomes a food when taken in smaller doses. Tliere is no other agent
known to science to which such properties are given.
A food may be said to be any substance solid or fluid necessary to
sustain the processes of nutrition, or the absorption of those materials
which enter into the composition of the frame, or of others that may
be changed into them in the interior of the body.
Dr. Edmunds defines food as that which being innocent in relation
to the tissues of the body is a digestible or absorbable substance, tbat
can be oxidized in the body and decomposed in such a way as to giveup to the body the force which it contains.
Foods are usually divided into nitrogenous — containing nitrogen as
albumen, gluten, etc ; and non-nitrogenous, not containing nitrogen,
as fats, starch, sugar, vegetable acids. Sugar (or other substances as
starch that can be changed or converted into sugar) is the only substance that can produce alcohol.
One hundred parts of cane sugar and water produce, after fermentation or the putrefaction of the sugar, 50.3 to 50.27 parts of carbonic
acid, and 52.62 parts of alcohol. (See " Alcohol and Science," p. 19.)
It must be very clear that what is formed by the decomposition of
sugar cannot contain the properties of the sugar destroyed. More than
one half of the elements of the sugar is lost by being changed into carbonic acid, and the remaining elements ai'e changed into alcohol. So
that if all the elements of the alcohol were as nutrient as when in the
form of sugar, to say nothing of the poisonous nature of alcohol, it
would, as a food, be less than half the value of sugar.
Some have a

138

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

notion that because malt liquors, wine and spirits are made from food
substances they must be food. Let us examine the fallacy for a
moment :
If three bushels of barley, 156 lbs., make a barrel of beer (2 bushels
is used in England to make a barrel, and 2^ bushels in the United States)
5.2 lbs. or 83 ounces of barley will make a gallon, (there is lost in
malting 20 oz. as malt-coons ; in mashing as grains, 27.4 oz. ; in fermenting 13.4 oz., in fining, as barrel bottoms, etc., 9 oz. : a total loss
of 70 ounces, thus leaving in each gallon of beer 13.2 ounces of the
barley, being chiefly gum worth little or nothing as food. Well might
Baron Liebig say, if a man drink 8 or 10 quarts of the best Bavarian
beer (equal to lager beer) a day, in the course ©f twelve months he
will have taken into his system the nutritive constituents of a fivepound loaf of bread.
Alcohol contains three elements — viz., three parts or atoms of carbon, six parts of hydrogen and one part oxygen. It does not contain
nitrogen, and hence is not flesh-forming food, is not therefore a food,
in any sense.
But,
Alcohol like fat is a hydro-carbon and hence may form fat, but we
have no evidence that it does. The drinks that produce fat are those
that contain sugar in addition to alcohol, as rum, sweet wine and
beer.
It is the sugar, and not the alcohol, that produces fat.
If we could prove that alcohol produces fat, it would be no argument in its favor, as fat except in very small quantity is a disadvantage ;
for it is something thrown into the loose tissue, more than the body
requires, and is dangerous if too much in excess. It is well known
that drinkers suflfer from fatty disease of the heart and other tissues.
This being an unnatural condition, if alcohol produces it, instead of
being a food, it is a poison or destroyer.
As alcohol is a hydrocarbon does it give heat to the body? The
experiments of scientists and the experience of voyagers to the Arctic
regions, all combine to declare with one accord that alcohol is
not a heat producer but a heat diminisher, and is not a respiratory food.
Neither is it a mineral food, for it contains none of the basic elements
of saline or mineral food.
Alcohol does not fulfill the requirements of the body as a drink, but
interferes with them. It does not quench thirst, but encourages and
increases it, and as a substitute for water it is Avorse than useless, for
it cannot in any way supply the oflices of water in the animal organism.
Alcohol is so greedy for water that it wiU seize on the watery tissues
and deprive them of a large portion of their moisture. Alcoholic
liquors do not and cannot fill the oiSce of either food or drink, for
taken in moderate quantity they are useless if not injui'ious, while in
.excess they interfere with the function of natural food and drink, hence

DR. HARGRExVVES'

VIEWS

OX

ALCOHOL.

139

are neither food nor drink ; but in every sense poisons. That they are
not necessary as a beverage, but an injury even in moderation, is proved
by life insurance statistics and the mortality of persons in the different
trades and professions in England as follows : Since 1847 the Temperance and General Provident Institution of England (Life Insurance
Company) has had two classes of members : The Temperance Section —
all total abstainers ; and the General Section, to which moderate drinkers
are admitted. For the last twenty years, 1866 — 1885, in the General
Section the expected deaths were 5431, the actual deaths that occurred
were 5284. But in the Temperance Section, where the expected deaths
were 3385, only 2408 died. This is the difference between the strictly
moderate drinkers and total abstainers. The working-men in England
between 25 and 65 years of age die at the rate of about 15 for
every 1000 living. During the three years, 1880, 1881 and 1882,
where 967 men of all occupations died, 1521 publicans died, and 2205
publicans' servants died ; and maltsters, who handle only the original
food material and not necessarily the fermented alcoholic liquor, only
had a mortality of 830. Then again where these 1521 publicans died
only 701 agricultural laborers, 631 farmers, 599 gardeners and 556
clergymen. In fact where 15 working-men died, 30 publicans died
(Dr. Edmunds). The Register General's supplement to the 45th
Report, 1885, page xxxvi. says: "The mortality of men who are
directly concerned in the liquor trade is appalling ! " The above figures
answer the question, nothing more need be added.
Is alcohol necessary or indispensable as a medicine ?
There is greater diversity of opinion on this question than on any
other connected with the alcoholic controversy. We find two classes
of physicians of equal professional standing and ability : one entirely
discarding the use of alcohol as an agent in the treatment of disease ;
and the other who use it and believe it useful and necessary, while the
former deem it useless and injurious.
It must be borne in mind that the advocates of the use of alcohol
as a medicine cannot claim any special advantage that cannot be
claimed in a higher degree for the non-alcoholic treatment by those who
have stricken it from their list of curative agents. From my own experience, observation and investigations during twenty-five years of
medical practice and the testimony presented on both sides of the
question, I am firmly of the opinion that alcoholic beverages — brandy,
whisky, wine, etc., may be stricken from the list of curative agents to
the benefit of patients under all forms of disease. If alcohol is ever
used, it should be administered in the form of dilute alcohol of known
definite strength to suit the needs of the case, and stopped as soon as
the necessity for it ceases. It is the rankest empiricism for a physician to prescribe the common alcoholic beverages, for he is entirely

140

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

i"-norant of what the mixture contains, or its alcoholic per centage.
From my individual experience corroborated by so many other physicians, many of great eminence in the profession, I am constrained to
believe what the late Dr. John Higginbottom, F. R. S., after more
than fifty years of practice said : '■'■Alcohol is neither food nor physic^"
for alcohol in all its forms, instead of nourishing, poisons ; instead of
strengthening, it lueakens ; instead of stimulating, narcotizes and paralyzes; instead of ircreasing the vital forces, it diirmiishes force, produces disease and is an agent of degeneration and death.
William Hargreaves.
I am also indebted to the suggestion of Dr. Hargreaves for
the following brief but explicit and comprehensive letter from
Dr. W. Paine of Philadelphia. Dr. Paine is an independent
and original investigator, and his terse and emphatic testimony, based upon long experience, observation, and chemical
as well as strictly medical investigation should have great
weight with practical men who desire to know whether alcohol is a curse or a benefit — a poison, a medicine or a food.
Philadelphia,

Aug. 16, 1887.

Dear Sir :— Your letter of June 25tli was received, soliciting my
opinion as to the effect of alcohol upon man, and whether it be a poison or a food, and whether it is useful, necessary or indispensable as
a beverage or medicine. In reply I would state that according to my
experience it is never useful as a medicine, as there are no circumstances or conditions where other stimulants or antiseptics are not
more useful and free from the poisonous influences of alcohol ; even
for the preparation of tinctures and to prevent fenuentation.
Glycerine, salicylic acid, bisulphite of soda, lime, potassium and
many other antiseptics and solvents are preferable. As to whether
it acts as a poison on the system I think that it does alivays and
that as an article of food its poisonous influence far outweighs any
beneficial results that might occur from its use. Whatever excuse
there might have been for its use as a medicine, when the knowledge
of stimulants and antiseptics were more limited than now, there
certainly can be none at the present time.
Yours truly,
Hon. Henry W. Blair.

W. Paine.

U. S. Senate, Washington.
The following letter, with pamphlets accompanying, was
received from A. B. Palmer, M. D., LL. D., Professor of

DR. PAINE

DR. PALMER.

141

Pathology and Practice, etc., University of Michigan, a distinguished writer of medical treatises and President of the
Section of Pathology of the International Medical Congress
which met in Washington, September 5th inst., and I regret
that I have not more space so as to give the contents of this
very able paper in full.
I have done my best to select the most important things
contained in it, except such as have been already considered.
University of Michigan^ Department of Medicine and Surgery, \
Axx AuiiOu, JMicu., June 27, 18S7.
J
My Deak Sir: — Your letter of the 2oth inst. is just received. 1
send you a " Report" which I made to the Michigan State Medical
Society two years ago, which contains not only my views, but those
of various eminent gentlemen in the profession, which \'ou can make
such use of as you may judge best for your purpose. "When the
report was made no one in tlie society openly dissented from any of
the views presented. Had they done so I should have endeavored
to sustain them.
The " food or poison" question is there stated much more fully
than could be in a letter. "Whether a small quantity is capable of
being transformed into force in the system or not is not a material
point. If it is so changed, in the healthy condition when other food
is taken, it interferes with appropriation of other food, so as to
lower heat and other forms of force more than its own transformation increases them.
But its characteristic action upon the body — that by which it does
harm or good, if good it ever does, especially in health — is as a
narcotic, — as a substance which directly impresses the nervous system.^
and that impression when not acting as a medicine in disease is
always poisonous — that is, it does harm move or less, and when taken
in sufficient quantities, but independent of great bulk, destroys life.
It answers all the conditions of a poison. In a little volume, a
notice of which I inclose, you will find in the appendix a reply to
Sir James Paget, of London, some matter that may interest you.
I would advise you to wi'ite to Prof. N. S. Davis, M. D., LL. D.,
Chicago, for his opinion, and I would refer you to his work on
Practice of Medicine, and also to a similar work of mine for fux'ther
views, which you will find in the library where copyrighted books
are kept.
Yours, truly,
Hon. Hettot W. Blair.
U. S. Senate, Washington.

A. B. Palmer.

142

THE

TEMPEEANCE

MOVEMENT.

The following are selections from Dr. Palmer's address :
The action of alcohol upon the living system may properly be
considered under two heads :
First, Its physiological action, or its effects on the S3'stem otherwise in a healthy state.
Second, Its action as a tlierapeutic agent, or as a medicine in the
treatment of various diseases and injuries, or its effects in morbid
conditions.
This distinction is important to be made, but with alcohol, as
with every other medicine, its essential therapeutical effects are
governed, and must be judged of, largely by its physiological action.
This, after some general observations, will first be described.
The different substances taken into the system and operating
upon it are classified rather loosely and in a general wa}^ as foods,
poisons and medicines.
A food is a substance which, when taken into the alimentary
canal, is capable of being absorbed from it, and of serving either
to supply materials for the growth of the body, or for the replacement of matter which has been removed from it, and which thus
effects renewal. Foods, to replace matters which have been oxidized,
must themselves be oxidized. Foods by such oxidation must be at
least force generators, and all the higher forms are tissue formers.
Some substances, such as inorganic salts and some organic
materials, serve to influence certain actions which may result in the
liberation of energy ; or, acting as inhibitory or restraining agents,
may check the activity of parts, and by these effects serve as force
modifiers. The internal organs of the body are balanced and
governed in their action by excitor and inhibitory nerves, and paralyzing the inhibitory, as well as stimulating the excitor, nerves and
functions, will increase, though generally abnormally, the action of
the organs concerned. The removal of the pendulum of a clock,
or the balance wheel of a watch, though adding no force, will allow
the mechanism to run on more rapidly until it runs down. The
paralyzing of the inhibitory nerves may give an appearance of
stimulation, but in this, real and useful force is not augmented.
These conditions may lead an observer to false "conclusions, giving
the impression that a real sedative, operating upon inhibitory functions, isa stimulant.
But excitors, such as condiments, mustard, pepjDer, cinnamon,
etc., increase certain actions, though they yield very little or no
force by their oxidation. They stimulate the mouth and other parts
of the alimentary canal, increasing the flow of digestiA^e secretions,
and often increase the appetite for food, and the power of digesting

DE.

PALMER'S

CONCLUSIONS.

143

it. Food, digested and appropriated, is force, and thus tlie condiment may indirectly produce force. Some substances diminish
action, general or special, and that leads to the diminution of all
force in the system. Other substances, as the active principle of
tea and coffee, or of the coca leaves, make impressions upon the
sj'stem which modify actions, resulting in changes of various kinds.
These cannot be regarded as foods, as they supply no appreciable
force by their oxidation, nor do they furnish any appreciable amount
of material for supplying the tissues. They have, however, an
apparent sustaining effect greater than alcohol.
According to Prof. H. N. Martin, of Johns Hopkins University,
one of the latest and most expert experimenters, and one of the
most authoritative winters on physiology in this country, and whose
work on the " Human Body" has received the rare distinction of
being approved b}^ our State Board of Health, a food must fulfill
the following conditions :
Firsts It must contain the elements which it is to furnish and
replace in the body, and also those elements leaving the bod}^
Substances are of no use as foods which are not capable of oxidation under the conditions prevailing ia the system, and which are
not capable of construction into its tissues.
Second, Foods must be capable of being absorbed from the alimentary canal, and either by themselves, or the changes they
undergo, must be capable of furnishing force, or the elements of
tissues.
Third, (And this is his precise language), "Neither the substance itself, nor any of the products of its transformation in the
body, must be injurious to the structure or activity of an}' organ.
If so it is ^poison, not a food."
A poison is briefly defined by the quotation from Prof. Martin iu
this last sentence. It is a substance which, when applied to or
taken into the body, by its peculiar qualities independent of mere
mechanical properties or of large bulk, is capable of inflicting injury
upon the organism, either in its functions or structure, and which
when used in certain quantities, but still independent of great bulk,
may produce death.
Medicines are substances given for the purpose of modifying favorably morbid actions and conditions, and are capable of producing
such effects. They are generally injurious to j)ersons in health, and
are beneficial only when they produce favorable changes in diseased
states. The same article may be a medicine or a poison according
to the purpose and the conditions of its use. Thus, opium, prussie
acid, arsenic, and corrosive sublimate are deadly poisons, but used
in proper quantities, and in relation to certain morbid conditions,
they are useful medicines.

144

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Again, some articles are both medicines and foods. Of this class
cod liver oil and malt are examples. Neither of these, however,
has poisonous properties, in the ordinary sense of these terms.
These facts and principles seem necessary to be borne in mind
for the purpose of placing alcohol where it belongs, and for understanding its proper actions.
After a careful description of the physiological effect of
alcohol upon the system similar to what has been already given
in this work, Dr. Palmer proceeds ;
I have thus minutely, and I fear tediously, traced the general
acute or immediate physiological effects of alcohol, and jiave showed
its analogy — its substantial identity — with that of chloroform and
ether, in order to enable us to see more clearly to what class of
agents it belongs.
If chloroform is a poison, alcohol is essentially a poison. We
waive, for the present, the question of its food properties. If such
properties exist, they are so slight and trival, compared with its
other actions, as not to be worthy, in this connection, of being
brought into the account. If chloroform is a narcotic, alcohol is a
narcotic. If chloroform is an anaesthetic, alcohol is an anaesthetic.
If one is essentially a depressing agent, so is the other. Theii
strong resemblance no one can question. The chief difference is
that the alcoholic narcosis is longer continued, and its secondary
effects are more severe.
It is this narcotic or anaasthetic action of alcohol, its power to
diminish sensibility or modify the feelings, rendering the individual less conscious of outward disagreeable impressions, relieving a sense of fatigue, of pain, of dragging weight, of mental
depression and distress, which has led to the popular error respecting it,and the contradictory uses made of it. It is in consequence of its diminishing outward impressions and inward
monitions that it is taken to warm in winter, and cool in summer,
to soothe in affliction, and render insensible to reproach or the
upbraidings of conscience.
He then cites recent experiments which prove the former
opinion, that alcohol stimulated the heart by an increase of
real force, to be a mistake. It creates a flutter, but decreases
power. Tliere is no increased arterial pressure, which pressure
is known to be the evidence of heart force. Increased frequency of pulsation is often the strongest evidence of diminished power — witness the fluttering pulse of extreme weakness.
*' The report of Drs.

Ringer and

Sainsbury closes with the

Rev.

yosepli

Cook.

HEREDITARY

CONSEQUEXCES

OF

ALCOHOLISM.

145

following remark, announcing the most important fact which
these experiments confirm, viz. : ' That by their action on the
cardiac tissue these drugs (the alcohols) are clearly parali/zant,
and this appears to be the case from the outset, no stage of
increased force of construction preceding.' — (Practitioners
[London], May, 1883, p. 350.)"
He states the following very important fact not sufficiently
emphasized hitherto : " There is a connection, often marked,
in the use of the different narcotics. The alcohol habit tends
to produce the opium habit, and the reverse ; one may be
substituted for the other, and the two are often indulged
together. The same principle, to a greater or less extent,
applies to the wide-spread tobacco habit, and to the less prevalent chloroform, chloral and hasheesh habits. The indulgence in any one begets a tendency to indulge in others. The
habitual use of any of them produces a constitutional narcotic
state, different from the normal."
Dr. Palmer confirms all that is elsewhere said of the hereditary consequences of the use of alcohol, and in regard to the
effect of moderate use he says that: "Morbid qualities of a
milder character in the parents may be exaggerated and otherwise modified in the offspring. Thus, inehrietu with its
ordinary perversions in the parent may become idiocy or
insanity in the child ; and moderate drinking in the father,
creating an appetite which in him is controlled, may produce
drunkenness in the son, or even dipsomania in the son or the
grandson, which may be beyond all control. Our personal
observations have afforded sufficient instances of this kind,
and the general testimony of those who have given attention
to this subject abundantly confirms the statement." And
closes the topic thus : " The occasion will not admit of a
further discussion of the subject of heredity in its relations to
alcoholism and the other narcotic habits. These habits are
the present bane — a crying evil of nearly the entire world,
and we may well consider and teach others to consider the
Influence of our personal indulgence upon those that are to
come after us — the habits of this generation upon those that
are to come."
I have space but for so much of his able discussion of the
action of alcohol as a medicine :
10

146

THE

TE3IPEiiANCE

MOVEMENT.

The discussion of the therapeutic properties of alcohol takes us
into another department of scientific principles and practical considerations. While the remedial effects of medicines in disease are
largely determined by their essential action in health, yet the difference of condition in these respective states is such that an agent
which may affect injuriously the one may act beneficially upon the
other. No one can suppose that opium, mercury or strychnine can
do other than injury to a person in health, yet their temporary
actions in certain diseases are beneficial.
Alcohol, though not a stimulant in its essential action, nor an increaser of power in a healthy person, may possible indirectly act as^
an increaser of force in a sick or injured one. By soothing a.
depressing irritation, or by relieving a severe shock, or by modifying favorably some pathological condition, thus removing or abating:
an injurious cause, a beneficial effect may follow.
He gives us the following as the latest teaching of science
as to the development of force by the oxidation or burning
of alcohol in the body :
The question as to the oxidation of any portion of the alcohol
taken into the system, and the consequent development of force by
it, is not absolutely settled. Baron Liebig, who for a time held
great sway in the scientific, especially the chemical, world, taught
that alcohol, a hydro-carbon, united with oxygen in the lungs, producing carbonic acid and water, thus becoming " respiratory food,"
and in so doing producing heat and perhaps other forms of force.
The simplicity of this theory (for it was only theory), and the high
authority of its author, caused it to be quite generally accepted ^
though resting upon a basis so purely speculative, and, as declared
by high modern authority, " without a single experimental fact for
its support." But Drs. Prout and Percy, of England, Booker, of Ger
many, Davis, of this country, and others, ascertained by the most
direct and conclusive experiments, that less carbonic acid was given
off from the lungs, and therefore less combustion of carbonaceous
matter occurred in them, when alcohol was taken, than without it ;
and that the sum total of elimination of effete matters was diminished by the presence of this article in the system. This proved
that alcohol retarded those chemical and vital changes by which
nutrition, secretion and elimination are effected. The inference
from this was that, by this article, under the circumstances in which
these experiments were tried — in comparative health and with an
ordinary diet — the production of force was diminished and not increased. This inference was corroborated by the fact that the thermometers showed that the production of heat was diminished, and

CHANGES

OF

SCIENTIFIC

OPINION.

147

presumably other forms of force also, and that Liehlg's theory teas
untile. Numerous experiments have since proved the absorption
of the alcohol from the stomach unchanged, its diffusion throughout
the body in the blood, and its passage out of the body by the lungs^
by the skin, by the kidneys, and other excretions, still unchanged.
The following summary of the changes of scientific knowledge and opinion in the recent past and of the rapidly increasing: evidence o-oins; to establish the worst that has ever been
alleged against the terrible scourge of alcohol closes Dr.
Palmer's pamphlet and is especially timely and valuable ;
We thought, and we may sometimes still think, it makes us witty.
We know from observation it makes men silly.
We thought it brightened the intellect and might make men wiser.
We find that in the long run, at least, it dulls the intellect and
makes men foolish.
Wine has been called the " milk of age," and we thought it supported advanced life. We know that the aged live longer and
retain their powers better without its use.
As a medicine, or prophylactic measure, we thought it protected
against epidemic diseases.
We now know it invites attacks.
We thought it prevented and even cured consumption. We know
it is the most frequent cause of at least one form of that disease —
fibroid phthisis.
We thought, moderately used, it was good for many things.
Those who have given most careful attention to the subject believe
it is good for very few things.
The demonstrations of modern science have shown the truth of
the ancient saying of the Wise Man : " Wine is a mocker, strong
drink is raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise."
The preceding view of this subject prompts us in conclusion to
say that, as our scientific knowledge of alcohol advances, our practice with it and our language respecting it should change.
As to its physiological effects, we have certainly in many respects
been mistaken in the past. We have said it excited the vaso-motor
nerves of the surface, and thus caused increased vascular action in
the cutaneous circulation. We know now it depresses those nerves
and causes passive dilatation of the surface vessels. We thought
it increased animal heat. The thermometer shows it diminishes it.
We thought that from more blood coming to the surface, and sometimes causing a feeling of warmth, it would diminish the danger
from exposure to cold. We find that from less heat being produced
in the centers, and more being lost from the surface by the increased

148

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

blood in the superficial vessels, the danger of exposure to cold
under its influence is greatly increased.
We said the alcohol taken was oxidized in the lungs, and that
increased heat and other forms of force were thus produced. We
find it is not thus oxidized, or, if at all, in so small a quantity that
its effect is ordinarily much more than counterbalanced by the
diminution of the oxidation of other hydro-carbons which it produces ;so that under its influence heat and the other forms of force
are lessened.
We thought it increased muscular strength, and it was taken to
aid men in their work. We find that it diminishes muscular power,
both for immediate action and with reference to endurance.
We thought, as it often makes one feel stronger, that this was
evidence that one is stronger. We now know that this feeling is
deceptive, and is not even presumptive evidence of increased
strength. We see that the drunken man while boasting of his
strength falls to the ground.
We said it was a direct heart excitor. We now know it is a
direct heart depressor.
We said, and nearly all the text-books still say, it is a direct
cardiac stimulant. We know from most conclusive experiments it
is a direct cardiac jjaralyzant.
The following letter from Dr. Alexander Wilder a widely
known and eminent practitioner, of Newark, New Jersey,
shows how alcohol may be used in some cases with curative
effect, but the necessity of the creation of a sense of responsibility which is not felt, and the exercise of a rigid caution which is not now generally exercised by the profession
in prescribing this dangerous agency is particularly emphasized in his closing words, lieferring to the heedlessness
which now prevails, he says: "I regard such prescribing
as unquestionably
a stigma upon the medical profession.
Till that time " (when there shall be more care by
the profession in this regard) " we must expect men, aye, and
women, too, to become and continue drunkards, having been
seduced into this degradation by their medical advisers." If
the profession continues to be wrong — guilty — as thus charged,
how can we have hope for the country or the world ? Doctors
discovered distillation ; doctors can destroy the destroyer
which they have let loose upon mankind. Will you do it^
Is there any other so great question upon the profession ?

DR. WILDER

OX

ALCOHOL

AS

A

MEDICINE.

149

Could not the International Congress make professional
laws which shall forbid the criminal liberality and indiflereuce with which members of the profession who are subject
to its censure, administer this fatal drug? Cannot this form
of murder, or worse than murder, be turned over to the
quacks? We are on our guard against them, or if not, must
blame our own folly. But we are betrayed by our " old
family physician ; " we become drunkards by the advice and
order of the friend in whom we most trusted, and to whose
hands we have confided the issues of life.
It is a breach of trust, and unless the great organizations
and the individual members subject to their discipline attend
to this thing, the growing intelligence of the common people
will curse their worse than quackery, and more and more
will resort to humbug and imposition as the lesser evil.
Newark, N. J., July 14, 1SS7.
Dear Sir: — I grew up in Oneida county, N. Y., when temperance and teetotalism, etc., swept over the region like a prairie fire,
and I was deeply affected by the general sentiment. It may be
that my repl}^ to your questions will be colored by that early influence. Nevertheless, I think I have it in my power to be candid.
I read with much care the argument of Anstie and others designed
to prove that alcohol is a food. But conviction failed me ; I do not
beheve it. There is good in everything if we did but know. The
good of alcohol, however, does not consist in its quality as a food.
If I should modify this statement, it would bo to admit the article
into the catalogue of degraded substances along with tainted meats,
crude or fermenting vegetables, etc. I would not expect mucli
stamina from alcohol-nourished men.
Your other inquiry in regard to the merits of alcohol as a drink
or medicine is somewhat more difficult to answer critically. I have
made several personal experiments with results more or less satisfactory. From infancy I abhorred whisky, rum and brandy, and
even now can swallow either only by a forced effort.
The fermented beverages appear to have afforded a varied result.
From my twentieth j^ear I had been a sufferer from indigestion
which had refused the aid of medicine or regimen. But in 1852,
almost from desperation, I resorted to ale, ''Greenways," I think,
using it at intervals of twice a week with most gratifying results.
After some months, however, I fell off from it again. Again, when
attacked by pneumonia in May, 1871, 1 found it almost impossible
to swallow Croton water, but could drink Albany ales with ease and

150

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

"benefit. The beverage manufactured at Poughkeepsie was too
strong for me. At a later attack in January, 1885, to which I
almost succumbed, I had utter intolerance of brandy, rum and
whisky, which my medical advisers earnestly pressed upon me ;
but " Jersey cider " was used with much comfort and benefit. I
am disposed, however, to divide the praise with the acid, as counteracting the wasted condition of the bod}'. I believe that no ale
would have met the case, and that I would not have survived the
stronger liquors. I say this in all candor and impartially. I
have also made observations in other cases. Once, when a patient
was afflicted with " hay-fever" and the case appeared intractble, I
employed whisky with gratifying results. The peculiar exaltation
of vital force appeared to be the thing required. I presume, however, that this was but an idiosyncrasy. As a general conclusion
I am satisfied that the utility of alcohol as a medicine is but precarious. When it is but occasionally employed there may be sometimes an incidental advantage ; but if the use should be persisted
in this advantage would be very certain to disappear. I have little
more to say in its favor, while as a drink I have very generally
witnessed its use to be hurtful.
Physicians who have confidence in their art seldom prescribe
alcohol. It is chiefly done by those who believe little in the utility
of drugs, or who indulge in alcoholic stimulants themselves. I
)-egard such prescribing as unquestionably a stigma upon the medical profession. To this complexion I am convinced we all must
come at last. Till that time, however, we must expect men — aye,
and women, too — to become and continue drunkards, having been
seduced into this degradation by their medical advisers.
Quis mstodes custbdiet ? I remain with sincere esteem,
Yours truly,
Hon. Henry W. Blair.

Alexander

Wilder.

U. S. Senate, Washington.
Dr. A. C. E.embaua;h, of Philadelphia, who ranks among
the ablest and most successful members of the profession,
sends me the following letter :
Philadelphia, 7-11-1887.
Dear Sir :— Please excuse my tardy reply to your communication
of June 25th, as I was absent at Gettysburg at the reunion of tlie
Blues and the Grab's ; have had a good time
Doctors as
a class are on the wrong side of the alcohol question in my estimation. Istand with the Carpenters, B. W. Richardson, of England,
also James Edmunds, M. D., M. R. C. P., etc., and with Dr. W.
Hargreaves, author of "Worse

than Wasted."

You should read

DR. REMBAUGH

: " ALCOHOL

A

POISON."

151

that if you have not alread}' done so. I believe that alcohol is a
poison and in no sense a food. I have no use for it as a food, drink
or medicine, and I believe it is never used in either large or small
quantities without absolute harm to the one partaking of it, and the
sooner it is banished from the land the better it will be for all the
people.
Yours for the war against alcohol,
A. C. Rejibaugh.
Hon. H. W. Blair.
U. S. Senate, Washington.
Dr. Rembaugh, in an address delivered before the Social
Science Association of Philadelphia, May 28, 1885, published
by the Association has collected many striking facts, opinions
of distinguished physicians, etc., and the latest scientific
deductions, which are set forth very impressively in a printed
paper inclosed with his letter. Considerable of the matter is
taken from "The Foundation of Death," by Alexander Gustafson, one of the best and most philoso[)hical books on this
problem, and is so credited by Dr. Eembaugh.* I collate
some of the more important, regretting that I cannot give
more, and hoping that the pamphlet may have general circulation among the profession as well as the people.
Dr. W. B. Carpenter, the most renowned of living physiologists, says : "The introduction of alcohol into healthy blood
can do nothing but mischief; that no one who is familiar with
the action of poisons upon the living animal body, and has
made the nature of that action a special study, has the
smallest hesitation in saying that alcohol is a poison." "Every
legitimate food satisfies in given quantities. Alcohol is not a
food and supplies no natural craving — from its very nature
it demands more and more," says Eev. Dr. Cuyler. The
bakers of Kew York were at one time very much exercised
over the waste of alcohol that was not saved from their baking bread. Two hundred gallons of alcohol can be secured
from the smoke produced by burning 29,000 cords of wood.
The nutritive power of foods depend on the proportion
which can be made available for the renovation of the body.
Alcohol has not been found in the living organism except in
the v> aste and refuse, and only in infinitesimal traces.
*" The Foundation of Death" is one of the great works in the literature
-of Temperance and sbould be widely read.

152

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Dr. L. A. Klien, speaking of the effects of the use of alcohol
during the siege of Paris, says : " We had plenty of alcohol,
but it did not make us warm, it did not replace food of any
kind. Let me tell you that ..... nothing will make you
feel the cold more, that nothing will make you feel the dreadful sense of hunger more than alcohol." Linnaeus said ;
" Man sinks gradually by this fell poison ; first he favors it,
then warms to it, then burns for it, then is consumed by it."
" It has been instanced by the deaths of Pitt and Fox and an
army of others as due to the use of alcohol, by which they
sought to supplement energies already too exhaustingly taxed.
With our way of living, our passions and worries, man no
longer dies, but kills himself. To prolong life it is necessary
to live soberly. The chief enemy of the longevity and health
of the race is alcohol. Sufficient and agreeable rest, enough
undisturbed sleep ; but to how many of the toiling millions
who labor for bread by muscles or brain, are these essentials
vouchsafed ? All temperance people should look forward with
no little hopefulness to the time when eight hours shall be
recognized as the maximum of working hours, when the
weary brains and muscles will not seek stimulation, but rest."
Dr. Kembaugh is right. Eight hours is enough. Qualify
everybody to perform labor and then ensure to all the
opportunity. The great problem is to distribute labor,
then the distribution of production will take care of itself.
No man has the right to more than his share of the work
of the world unless he is ready to give to those who have
not the opportunity or the ability to work, without fault on
their part, the production of that labor which he had no
right to perform. But if there were wisdom, as there sometime will be in our industrial system — brought about by
peaceful evolution — there would be intelligence in all, work
by all, and production for all. That is the millennium and
it is coming.
" Alcoholic fermentation results in two poisonous compounds, alcohol and carbonic acid." Dr. A. Carlysle says
that no living animal or plant can be supported by such
poisonous fluids, — on the contrary they soon become sickly
and perish under their influence. "A profuse amount of
gastric juice will no doubt digest food more rapidly than a

STIMULATED

ACTION

NOT STRENGTH.

153-

small amount, and therefore the abundant secretion of gastric juice provoked by the daily taking of a small amount
of alcohol may for a time promote digestion. But to urge
digestion is no more desirable than to urge youth." "'Beefsteak is 156 times more nutritious than wine " — if wine is
nutritious at all. " In fact there is no food in alcoholic drinks,
whether malted or spirituous. The fat of the beer drinker is
composed of those albuminous residues that remain undecomposed, not reducible to a form in which they can be excreted ;
they have to be stored away so as to prevent obstruction to
the circulation, and are therefore packed away under the skin."
Dr. Archibald Billing says : " Stimulants excite action, but
action is not strength." "The stimulating effects of alcohol
are really only finer shades of that same narcotic influence or,
in other words, paralysis. Prof. John Fiske says ; " The perpetual craving of the drinker in all probability is due to the
gradual alteration in the molecular structure of the nervous
system caused by frequently-repeated narcosis." Recent
years prove that the notion that alcohol is an auxiliary of
brain work is fallacious. It is no savings bank of muscular
strength, as in time it utterly destroys it. ''Eight ounces of
alcohol will make the heart lift 24 tons more, daily."
Now this is done without giving any strength — merely making the same horse go faster with the whip, on the same feed
as when doing a full day's work without castigation. Dr.
Rembaugh is not responsible for the last remark, but it is
true as all the evidence proves. "Dealers in ardent spirits
may be compared to men who should advertise for sale consumption, fevers, rheumatism, palsies and apoplexies." "Let
a druggist be so unfortunate as to cause by a mistake a single
death and the whole community is aroused, and the most
severe penalties of the law are inflicted upon him." " Hanging is the death penalty for a single murder. License is the
reward for wholesale murder."
Ah ! Dr. Rembaugh, is a crank ! Any liquor seller will say
so. And Dr. Rembaugh keeps right on declaring that we
must have National Prohibition ! Poor fanatic ! " Three
times as much liquor consumed per capita to-day as in 1840. ""
"This question has clearly become a national instead of a
state issue."
"Total prohibition is now our only salvation."'

154

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

" We must not legalize the liquor traffic with either high or
low license, or any kind of tax or stamp act, but we must set
our heads and hearts to annihilate the whole business."
He says high license has been proven an utter failure
wherever tried — he is against " blood money " and says
" away with such a revenue " — " the curse of God is on
revenue derived from the wrongs,
the miseries,
the poverty and suffering, the wretchedness, vice, crime,
insanity, idiocy of the people." Then he cites the experiences of the city of Des Moines — facts taken from the
records of the city clerk. "In 1871, license fee $150, there
were 12 saloons; in 1872, license fee $200, there were 25
saloons." Probably the population did not more than double
in one year, but the saloons did, although the license fee
was increased 33|^ per cent.
Again the Doctor gives us the fact — same city: "1880,
license fee $250, there were 49 saloons; 1882, license fee
$1,000, there were 60 saloons."
How do you account for that, my high license friend ? Dr.
Rembaugh says he got this from the city clerk — perhaps you
better write to the clerk yourself. Then Dr. Rembaugh
makes this brutal remark : ' ' The low groggery is far less
harmful and dangerous to the community than the gilded and
glittering saloon ; for here is where the temptation begins.
It ends in the low groggery where the helpless and hopeless
congregate."
Reading after the doctor one would contract a prejudice
against these beautiful slaughter houses, if he should ajive
way to his feelings. Philadelphia has " one drinking saloon
for every 29 voters ; one bakery for 164| voters ; and one
grocery for every 54^ voters." He cites many authors to
prove that alcoholism is hereditary, reproduces itself and
develops in disease, insanity, idiocy, and things of that
sort. He quotes Dr. Kroft Ebing,who thus disposes of the
" visiting-the-sins-of-the-father-upon-the-children" doctrine :
First generation : moral depravity, alcoholic excess.
Second generation : drink mania, attacks of insanity, general
paralysis.
Third generation : hypochondria, melancholia, apathy and
tendencies to murder.

Rev. Dr.

Tahnage.

THE

LAW

OF

HEREDITY.

155

Fourth generation : imbecility, idiocy and extinction of
family — this last a most desirable result if things are to go
on in this way.
Dr. Rembaugh says that the children of drunken parents
who escape the curse, are the exceptions and the escape is
seldom if ever a complete one. Gellius said that "the
children of drunkards are not likely to have sound brains,"
etc., etc., etc. It is hideous reading — one could endure it
if it were not true — but only on that consideration.
"Drink alone destroys more people than all the other
plagues together which afflict humanity." Buffon's Discourse
on Nature.
Another crank !
"A statement just issued by the Belgian Patriotic League
against drunkenness, thus sums up the present aspect of the
great drink question in Belgium. The number of public
houses in that country, which was 53,000 in 1850, had
increased to 125,000 in 1880, and is now 130,000. Suicides
in last 40 years increased 80 per cent., of insane 104 per
cent., of convicts 135 per cent. ; of workmen who die in
hospitals 80 per cent, are habitual drunkards."
SALOONS

TO

POPULATION

IN

THE

UNITED

STATES.

" In Nevada there is 1 drinking saloon to every Qb ; Colorado, 1to 65 ; California, 1 to 99 ; Oregon, 1 to 176 ; New
Jersey, 1 to 179 ; New York, 1 to 192 ; Louisiana, 1 to
200 ; Ohio, 1 to 225 ; Connecticut, 1 to 266 ; Massachusetts
1 to 256 ; Delaware, 1 to 258 ; Pennsylvania, 1 to 263 ;
Rhode Island, 1 to 266 ; Illinois 1 to 267 ; Maryland, 1 to 293 ;
AVlsconsin, 1 to 304; Minnesota, 1 to 311; Missouri, 1 to
337 ; Michigan, 1 to 350 ; New Hampshire, 1 to 376 ; Iowa, 1
to 377 ; Indiana, 1 to 380 ; Kentucky, 1 to 438 ; Nebraska, 1
to 487 ; Tennessee, 1 to 525 ; Texas, 1 to 549 ; Arkansas, 1
to 554 ; Alabama, 1 to 608 ; Georgia, 1 to 612 ; Florida, 1 to
653 ; Mississippi, 1 to 654 ; Virginia, 1 to 693 ; North Carolina,
1 to 708 ; Maine, 1 to 731 ; Vermont, 1 to 812 ; West Virginia.,
1 to 817 ; Kansas, 1 to 877 ; South Carolina, 1 to 708."
Dr. Rembaugh makes man}' practical suggestions. He says
that "it is of the utmost importance that the public mind should
be disabused of the idea that the various non-alcoholic drinks
are substitutes for alcohol, or that an}^ such substitutes are

156

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

required. Alcohol is a poison through and through ; the real
substitutes are also poisons — viz., ether, chloral, chloroform,
etc." "The digestive, nutritive qualities of barley are destroyed inthe boiling process of making beer." He urges
that coffee houses and pleasant places and resorts should be
provided of the very first class and on some comprehensive
plan. Perhaps saloon keepers and brewers and distillers
would change their business and cater for the health rather
than the disease of the public. Mr. L. O. Smith, the exbrandy king of Sweden, has done this, and now cooks to support the life of a nation he once did so much to destroy by
drink. There is a conscience in the liquor dealer and he must
be reached by an appeal to it and to his love of his kind —
which includes a living chance for himself.
Henry Ward Beecher said : "Every year I live increases
my conviction that the use of intoxicating drinks is a greater
destroying force to life and virtue than all other physical evils
combined." ThQ London Times says: "Drinking baffles us,
confounds us, shames us, mocks us at every point. It outwits
alike the teacher, the man of business, the patriot and the
legislator. Every other institution flounders in hopeless
difficulties ; the public house holds its triumphant course."
Cardinal Manning exclaims, speaking of the £140,000,000 =
$700,000,000 expended by the people of England year by
year for intoxicating drinks : " Can there be a more complete
waste ? Expend it in the drainage of England and the culture
of the land and there would be bread for the hungry mouths
of the people ;
in the manufacture of cloth and there
would be no man and no child without a coat on his back ;
in the building of houses fit for human habitation,
and there would not be a working man and his family without
a roof over his head
Nay, I will go further.
It is
not only a waste, it has a harvest. It is a great sowing
broadcast ; and what springs from the furrows ? Deaths,
mortality in every form, disease of every kind, crime of every
die, madness of every intensity, misery beyond the imagination to conceive."
To this utterance of the London Times quoted by Dr.
Rembaugh I will add that of the JSFew Yorh Tribune, that
these leading journals of the two hemispheres may be on

TESTIMONT

OF

LEADING

JOUENALS.

157

record in the cause of humanity together. March 2, 1884,
the Tribune says in an editorial on the liquor traffic, with
a force and moral elevation seldom excelled in human
composition :
It is impossible to examine any subject connected with the
progress, the civilization, the physical well-being, the religious condition of the masses, without encountering this monstrous evil. It
lies at the center of all political and social mischief. It paralyzes
energies in every direction. It neutralizes educational agencies.
It silences the voice of religion.
It baffles penal reform.
It
obstructs political reform
There is needed something of
that sacred fire which kindled into inextinguishable heat the zeal
of the abolitionists, and which compelled the abandonment of
human slavery to rouse the national indignation and abhorrence
against this very much greater evil.
Eesuming the thread of Dr. Rembaugh's pamphlet : Our
school children should be early taught the chemical and
physiological effects of alcohol. Dr. Channing, "A people
should be guarded against temptation to unlawful pleasures
by furnishing the means of innocent ones, such as produce
a cheerful frame of mind." Mr. J. A. Partridge asks
"why the honest working man should carry a drink-made
pauper on his back as he now does." "I w'ould appeal to
the myriads of the dead, dead through drink, whose history is still vocal with the anguish and despair that found
no utterance from the living lips." With a fact knotted
into the lash, Dr. Rembaugh gives a mighty parting stroke
to the blood-streaming back of the excoriated traffic, and
closes thus: "One million people depend on the beer traffic
for support in this country. In 1840 four gallons of liquor
were consumed for every man, woman and child in America ;
in 1883 the amount has increased from four gallons to tw^elve."
Nothing is so terrible to the traffic as the publication of the
truth. As we have already seen, this increase of quantity is
attended with diminution of intensity, but of pure alcohol we
now consume more per capita than in 1840. The poisonous
effect of a given quantity of alcohol is not diminished by its
administration through a large mass of fluid, and the aggregate evil was never greater among us than now.

158

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Dr. William Pepper of the University of Pennsylvania^
author of the great wOrk on Medical Practice, and whose
conceded prominence in the profession gives a special significance to whatever he may say, sends the following brief,
but decided and invaluable communication. I think it one
of the most encouraging indications of the time that the'
men who are making the medical history of to-day, and
whose names are to survive to coming generations, are more
and more espousing the cause of man against alcohol.
Commonly one hears the question put in this form : Is Alcohol a
food or a poison ? It is neither the one nor the other. It is not a
food in the common and correct acceptation of the term, though it has
points of resemblance with foods. It is not strictly speaking a poison,
though it often produces highly-poisonous effects. It is to be regarded
as a medicine or a drug, and belongs to the same class with Opium,
Indian Hemp, Tobacco and some analogous substances. Nearly all
healthy persons can with impunity take occasionally a small amount of
dilute alcohol. With some individuals, however, even the smallest
quantity disagrees and disorders digestion ; on the other hand a very
small proportion of individuals seem able to take large amounts regularly for many years without damage. But I do not doubt that this
impunity is more apparent than real, and that nearly all such persons
are slowly but surely injured by the habit. One of the worst features
of the action of alcohol in a large majority of young persons is that,
though taken in small amount and even in the form of light wines or
beer, its first agreeable effect is followed by a feeling of lassitude and
depression, readily mistaken for debility, and suggesting a repetition of
the stimulant. But these unpleasant feelings are the direct result of
the presence in the blood and tissues of poisonous matters, coming
from the imperfect digestion of the alcohol, or of food with whose
complete assimilation the dose of alcohol has interfered. Here evidently
is a fruitful source of functional disorder ; and still more is it a source
of gradually-increasing use, ending in actual excess, with its inseparable
physical and moral degradation. It is impossible to exclude from our
consideration this enslaving tendency which sepai-ates alcohol so widely
from all ordinary articles of diet, and relegates it to a special class of
drugs. I am indeed satisfied that all persons in good health are better
without alcohol in any form or in any amount, as a regular beverage.
If this is true of dilute alcohol, by which I mean light wines or beer
or greatly-diluted spirit, it may be asserted without hesitation that all
stronger forms of alcohol capable of causing positive local stimulation
or irritation of the stomach should be regarded purely as drugs, and

DR. pepper's letter.

159'

be used exclusively under medical advice. Their habitual use by
healthy persons is highly injurious and involves the risk of developing serious disease. It is, however, impossible to deny the great
value of alcohol even in large amounts during critical stages of some
acute diseases. And I can speak with contidence of the beneficial
effects, in suitable cases as determined by a physician, of small
amounts of dilute spirit, or of generous wine, taken as a stimulant
by weak and elderly persons. While, however, we admit the therapeutic value of alcohol in these and other suitable cases, it is clear
to me that eveiy medical man should prescribe it with a distinct
recognition in each individual case of the special danger attaching to
its habitual use.
William

PErPEU.

This long chapter must close. But there is no one thing
more important to the temperance reform than that the mediical profession should set its face lirmly — like a Hint, against
the use of alcoholic ])everages, and should rcsh'ain so far as
possible the administration of this dangerous drug in disease.
I believe that the grave degree of responsibility for the prevalence of intemperance, which attaches to those who pursue
this high calling by reason of the deserved and almost universal confidence reposed in them by the pco{)le, is more and
more realized ; and that as the teachings of Dr. Davis and
Dr. Richardson are studied, and more and more prevail, ''the
day of our redemption draweth nigli."

CHAPTEE
AL,COHOL

IS PAUPERISM

IX.
AND

CRIME.

The Two Great Burdens of Society — The Difference and the Likeness
between Them — What the Pauper Returns of Massachusetts Show —
Figures and Facts from Almshouse Superintendents — Sir Matthew
Hale's Statement of the Causes of Crime — Experience of New York
Officials — What Governor Dix said in 1873 — Startling Facts about the
Effects of Beer Drinking by Women — A New Hampshire Opinion
Based on Practical Experience.

PAUPERISM and crime are the two great burdens of
society. . Nearly every other form of taxation upon the
income or productive force of the people, whether imposed by
the state or submitted to voluntarily from motives of charity
or otherwise, is in the nature of an investment made with a
view of affirmative beneficial returns. Even money paid for
the relief of the sick, anticipates their restoration to health
and profitable life.
But money paid to a pauper, simply because he is a pauper,
too poor to live from his own exertions, has in view his individual relief from suffering — not any pecuniary good to those
who support him. Better for society that he be removed — he
is a mere cumberer of the ground. Eelief which gives opportunity for labor and a return for aid received, is but the
discharge of the great debt of society to afibrd every human
being the opportunity for honest toil, and I do not consider
that in any sense charity. I refer to the support of pauperism pure and simple.
In the case of crime, its detection and punishment, the
whole is a dead loss and burden placed upon honesty and
good citizenship ; indispensable, to be sure, for protection and
defense of society, but still the whole is an expenditure which
endeavors not to relieve the original injury, but to prevent
the infliction of like losses in future. Whatever has been
done is without remedy, even when a money penalty is exacted,
for then the loss is only shifted from the victim or the State
160

PAUPERISM

m

MASSACHUSETTS.

161

to the perpetrator, who is himself an actual, and should be a
productive, member of society, and it does not lessen the evil
to the whole that it falls upon one individual rather than
another. Crime is destruction, and pauperism is next to it.
Both consume everything and produce nothing — good. The
one is a fire to be put out for the future protection of all ; the
other lies helpless and hopeless on the bank of the Ganges.
The heathen throws the breathing but useless body into the
stream ; Christian charity builds a hospital and provides a
home. In either case, society would, in money at least, be
better off if there had been no pauper and no criminal. But
taxes for highways and for schools are money directly
invested in public and private happiness.
The traffic in alcohol is the chief creator and promoter of
these public evils, and in this chapter it is well to endeavor
to obtain an idea of their extent.
It will be at once apparent that there are various causes
which contribute to these evils ; and there is room for the
imagination as well as the judgment in apportioning to each
its aliquot share of the common bad result. Still, as we
know that alcoliolic poisoning is the great promoter of
hard conditions to labor, of laziness, mental, physical and
moral weakness, and vicious disposition in society, and that
these are the chief causes of absolute and helpless poverty,
(which is pauperism,) and of crime, it follows that strong
drink is very largely their indirect origin ; and we know that
in the overt act of crime, and in the manifest existence of
pauperism, spirituous drink is generally the direct agency.
I shall not enter upon elaborate calculations to fix the mathematical dimensions of this responsibility, but shall give some
facts from authentic sources, and opinions of high and competent authority, which should arouse public attention and
excite the public will to the extermination of this social
Fiend.
The pauper returns of the State of Massachusetts are
made annually to the Secretary of State, and it is well known
that this Commonwealth is in advance of any other community
in the fullness and accuracy of its social statistics ; while the
intelligence of her people, the vast variety and extent of her
industries, and the excellence of her government and institu11

162

THE

TEMPEEANCE

MOVEMENT.

tions, should make both pauperism and crime more rare than
elsewhere in the world. Notwithstanding these facts, there is
a great degree of both among her people.
The returns referred to show an average of 80 per cent, of
pauperism in the county of Suffolk, mainly the city of Boston,
to be occasioned by intemperance. In the year 1863, for
instance, the whole number of paupers relieved was 12,248,
of which number 6,048 were made so by their own intemperance, and 3,837 by that of parents and guardians, in all 9,885
— nearly five sixths of the whole number.
The report of the Board of State Charities, p. 202 (January,
1867), declares intemperance to be the chief occasion of
pauperism. Their fifth report says that "Overseers of the
poor variously estimate the proportion of crime and pauperism attributable to the vice of intemperance from one third in
some localities, up to nine tenths in others. In the sixth
report of the Board of Health, the Chairman, Dr. Bowditch,
states that he made the following inquiries, and received
replies from 282 of the towns and cities :
1 . What proportion of the inmates of your almshouses are there iu
consequence of the deleterious use of intoxicating liquors ?
2. What proportion of the children are there in consequence of the
drunkenness of parents?
The Superintendent of Deer Island Almshouse and Hospital replied : " I would answer the above by saying, to the best
of my knowledge 90 per cent, to both questions." The
authorities of the city of Springfield reported that they had
fed 8,052 tramps ; seldom found one not reduced to that condition by intemperance. "It is safe to say nine tenths are
drunkards." Paupers beget paupers. Pauperism descends
as certainly as scrofula, cancer, consumption or insanity.
The North American Review, of April, 1875, contains the
following from Dr. E. Harris, Kegistrar of the Board of Health
of New York : " A pauper named Margaret lived in Ulster
county some eighty-five years ago. She and two sisters
have begotten generations of paupers and criminals to such an
extent that the total number now known, mainly from Margaret— convicts, paupers, criminals, beggars and vagrants,
including the living and dead — is six hundred and twentj^-

Hon.

Geo. W. B am.

THE

SOURCE

OF

CRIME.

163

three. This mother of criminals has cost the county hundreds
of thousands of dollars." If society is endued with the right
of self-defense, shall such degraded and abandoned creatures
be permitted to perpetuate their kind? There is somewhat
too much of "personal liberty" in this, especially when we
are told that the primal cause of it all — alcohol — is to thus
breed criminals and vagabonds by the jail full, generation
after generation.
Sir Mathew Hale, Chief Justice of England, is one of the
few even among the greatest lawyers whose fame, acquired in
the administration of the law, breaks through the barriers of
mere professional immortality and survives age after age,
close cherished in the popular heart. Perhaps he was specially
eminent in the department of criminal jurisprudence, certainly
his " Pleas of the Crown " has never been surpassed as an
authority in that department of the law. In 1670 Chief
Justice Hale declared :
The places of judicature I have long lielcl in this kingdom have
given me an opportunity to observe the original cause of most of the
enormities that have been committed for the space of twenty years ;
and by due observation I have found that if the murders and manslaughters, the burglaries and robberies, the riots and tumults, the
adulteries, fornications, rapes, and other enormities that have happened
in that time, were divided into five parts, four of them have been the
issues and product of excessive drinking — of tavern or ale-house
drinking.
The testimonj' of eminent judges and of other high authorities ever since and down to the present day, both in Europe
and America, is to the same eflect. I have seen no authority
which places the proportion of crime committed as the oufcome of intoxicating drink at less than two thirds, while some
fix it with great confidence at nine tenths.
Dr. Elisha Harris of New York, after an inspection of the
prisons, wrote that full 85 per cent, of the convicts gave evidence of having been "in some larger degree enticed to do
criminal acts " from the use of intoxicating drinks, and the;
Board of Police Justices of that city, in 1874, say they arc
fully satisfied that intoxication is "the one great leading cause
which renders the existence of our police courts necessary."

164

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

The Report of the State Board of Charities of Massachusetts
for 1869 traces four fifths of the crime of the commonwealth
to intemperance. The inspectors of Massachusetts State
Prison, in 1868, say that "about four fifths of the number
committed the crimes for which they were sentenced, either
directly or indirectly, by the use of intoxicating drinks.
These men were confined for the more heinous crimes.
Judge Noah Davis, of New York, whose reputation is too
high and well known to require commendation says that
ninety per cent, of the criminal business of the courts is
caused by the liquor tratfic.
The Christian Advocate says : " Some years ago a striking comparison was made between Vineland, New Jersey,
and New Britain, Ct
They each had about 11,000
inhabitants ; New Britain had 80 saloons ; Vineland had none
New Britain paid $8,500 for the care of paupers; Vineland
$224.
New Britain paid for police $7,500 ; Vineland $75."
In 1872 the Board of Public Charities of Pennsylvania
said: "The most prolific source of disease, poverty and
crime is intemperance." The Citizens Association of Pennsylvania, which was chartered by the state, declare that it
will not be doubted that two thirds of the pauperism and
crime are justly attributed to intemperance. In 1867 the
cost of maintaining the prisoners in county jails and in the
penitentiaries of Pennsylvania w^as $1,464,029 — $2.45 for
each voter in that state — including paupers and criminals, due
to strong drinks, was $2,204,244.
In 1870 the cost of pauperism alone to this country was over
$7,000,000, direct loss from strong drink; indirect loss, as
much more. It is not less than $20,000,000 in all, yearly, at
the present day.
In 1873, Governor Dix, in his message to the New York
Legislature, said: "The alarming increase in the frequency
of the crime of murder in the city and its environs demands
your most serious consideration. Scarcely a day passes
without witnessing a brutal, and in many instances a fatal
assault, upon the persons of unoffending individuals, usually
in drinking saloons." Eio;ht thousand of the ten thousand
arrests in Baltimore were owing to the same cause in 1873.
Hon. William J. Mullen, prison agent of Philadelphia, in

BEER-DPJNKING

WOMEN.

165

a paper to the National Congress held in Baltimore in 1872,
stated that, "of the half-million persons who had been committed to the county prison of Philadelphia during the last twenty
years, there had been about five hundred for murder, seven
hundred for attempts to murder ; over forty thousand for
assault and battery, and over 200,000 for drunkenness. In
nearly every case of murder or attempt to murder, the parties
were intoxicated."
Rowland Burr, Esq., a magistrate of Toronto, Canada,
stated to the Canadian Parliament "that nine tenths of the
male prisoners and nineteen twentieths of the females are sent
to jail by intoxicating drinks. Of twenty-five thousand sent
to the Canada jails in four years, twenty-two thousand owed
their imprisonments to drinking habits.
In 1876 there were spent in Pennsylvania for criminals
$1,324,604; for dependents, $1,942,916 ; in all $3,267,520;
and Dr. Hargreaves says that "of this more than $2,000,000
is directly the result of drink and the licensed drink traffic ;
for every drink-shop is a moral plague-spot and a hot-bed
of destitution, vice and crime."
If we estimate the yearly direct cost of crime at one million
dollars for each million of population, which I am satisfied is
a low estimate, we have an aggregate of $60,000,000 at the
present time, $40,000,000, if not $50,000,000 of which could
be saved by destroying alcohol, and beside saving the money
we could ^jj'eren^ the crime also. I hope my money-loving
countrymen will excuse the suggestion of this last circumstance. Some old-fashioned people may think it important,
although of course it is nothing compared with the money.
I insert the following without note or comment. It is just
published. Will you please think of it for one half-hour,
and then w^rite to me your views of "National Prohibition?"
L. M. Hall, Superintendent of the Woman's Reformatory
Prison, Sherborn, Mass., narrates her experiences as follows
in Godey^s Lady's Booh:
Out of an examination of 204 inebriate women, I found that 128
began their drinking by the use of beer, 37 by drinking whisky (as
punch at first, usually), 20 began with wine, 8 with gin, and 11 could
not remember what beverage was first used. These young girls, mill
and shop girls lai-gely, began by going to some so-called refreshment

166

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

saloon with their friends, and the debutante usually began by sipping a
little tonic (made of hops, sugar and water, charged with carbonic
acid gas and colored with burnt sugar) ; beer soon followed, and soon
rioting, other kinds of intoxicants, recklessness and crime ; and what
was an innocent, foolish girl yesterday is to-day a branded criminal,
all for a glass of beer.
Alas ! how many ruined lives I have seen !
Beer was also the beverage which older inebriate women used to
entice the younger ones to drink. A call upon one of these old sots
was the signal for the pitcher of beer to be sent for, and a little
coaxing and urging would result in the first fatal glass being
indulged in. The steps were then easy. Beer is the trap which the
drunkard maker sets for the feet of the unwary, and he usually makes
sure of his prey because of it. A glass of raw whisky would have
presented but slight attraction to those overworked, half-fed girls, had
it been offered them at first. After that sleeping devil — the appetite
for intoxicants — had been aroused by beer it became altogether a different matter, and at last, in many cases, chloroform or peppermint oil
was added to the drink of these maddened creatures, so furious had
the appetite become for something stronger.
It may be of interest to note that out of the 204 inebriate women,
126 had been guilty of other crimes, and yet in but 16 instances did
the first commitment of crime antedate the habit of drinking.
Of the beverages first used, while in but 37 cases it began
with whisky, in 187 it had become the favorite beverage. Several
hopeless drunkards, far gone toward insanity, had never drank any
other intoxicant than beer.
One hundred and thirty -two were committed to prison for drunkenness, 56 for offenses against chastity and public order, and 16
for crimes against property. Their ages when last committed averaged 30^ years. Sixty-five were between 30 and 40 years of age,
49 between 25 and 31 years of age, 34 between 20 and 26 years of
age, 30 between 15 and 21 years of age. The remainder were over
41 years of age.
Many of the older ones could not tell how many sentences they have
received, showing the absolute uselessness of punishing these poor
creatures while the temptations are left in their way.
To show the effect upon the children of inebriate parentage, I collected the following: Of 111 inebriate mothers, 33 of whom had
inebriate husbands, 408 children were born. Of these 227 perished
in infancy and early childhood, and of the survivors many are doomed
evidently to an early death. In many cases the death of these children
was indirectly due to the inebriety of the parents, as cold, deprivation,
etc. Ages — Twenty-seven of the 204 women began to drink intoxicants before they were 10 years of age ; 11 between the ages of 9 and

A NEW

HA3IPSH1EE

OPINION.

167

15 ; 74 between 14 and 21 ; 37 between 20 and 26 ; 33 between 25
and 31 ; 19 between 30 and 41 ; 3 between 40 and 51.
Average age, 18 1-2 years. More than one half had formed habits
of intemperance before they were 21 years of age, and more than one
third at the giddy age of from 15 to 20 inclusive.
One hundred and thirty -two began to drink socially and with female
friends.
The following letter from Hon. A. G. Fairbanks of Manchester, X. H., is written as the result of many years of
practical experience and observation in the management of
the business affairs of a great county, embracing the two
cities of Manchester and Nashua, and a large rural population
also. Mr. Fairbanks was also for a long time a sheriff in
the same county. There could be no more
ness, as there is no better man.

competent wit-

Manchester, N. H., Sept. 5, 1887.
Dear Sir :— In accordance with your request, I will give you my
opinion of the effect of alcohol in all its different mixtures as the
cause of crime and pauperism so far as it has come under my observation, and perhaps it would not be out of place here to say that
from 1865 to 1874, I occupied the position of jailer of the county
of Hillsborough, the largest county in the Granite state, and from
1883 to the present that of commissioner for the same county, the
former position bringing me to know full well its effect upon the
offenders of the law, and my present, its effect as the cause of
pauperism. I would give it as my opinion in the matter of crime
that, directly and indirectly, it is safe to say that seventy-five per
cent, of all crimes can be traced to the use of alcohol as a beverage.
During the time I was jailer I had under my charge an average of
forty persons, and there is no risk in saying that thirty of them
(and then leave a good margin) came there from its use. I remember of once making the statement, in public as above, and that during the time I was jailer I had had about one thousand under my
cluuge, of all ages between that of eighty and that of the boy of
eight years. The question was at once asked, how long the boy of
eight had been a confirmed drunkard ; and then came up the fact in all
its force of our responsibility in the care and training of our children,
and that this boy's responsibility was not so great in his breaking
the law as was that of his parents, who were confirmed drunkards.
At the very time that their boy was found in the store into
which he had gained enti-ance in the night time, they were in a state
of intoxication.
The same statement which I have made in regard

168

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

to crime can be fully sustained in regard to pauperism^ and leave as
large, if not a larger margin against the use of alcohol as a beverage. Could our tax-payers look upon the crime and pauperism
caused by this, the greatest of evils, and one which they are taxed
to support, it would seem that they would rise in their strength and
suppress, if not banish, the monster evil from our land.
Hoping these few lines will aid you somewhat in the good cause
in which you are engaged, I remain, as ever,
Very truly yours,
A. G. Fairbanks.
It will be easy for any one who desires further statistics
showing the relation of intemperance to pauperism and crime
to be that of the first great cause, to obtain them ; but I
deem it unnecessary to mass them here.

CHAPTER
INTEMPERANCE

AMONG

X.
MANUAL

WORKERS.

A Topic that is closely connected with the Labor Problem — Testimony
taken by the Senate Committee — A ]\Ianchester Carpenters Thouc^litful Obsei-vations — Practical EtTectof the Drinking Habit on the Skilled
Trades — Wages and the Money Spent for Drinks — Some Considerations Based on Tentli Census Facts — Edward Atkinson's Calcidations —
George E. McNeiirs Contrary Views on the Subject of Economy — His
Statement of the Cost of Living — Mr. Powderlys Answer to a Critic —
A letter in which he Defends his Position as an Ulti-a Temperance
Man — His Presentation of the Cost of the Drinking Habit to Workingmen — Testimony of Fall River ^Nlill Hands — Some Final Considerations
upon the Relation of Temperance to the Wage and Labor Problems.

IN this chapter I desire to discuss briefly the causes, effects
and remedies of alcoholic intemperance amonir tliose
who depend upon their labor for support, and specially but
not wholly from an economical point of view. This topic is
closely connected with the labor problem, a subject which of
itself would require volumes, and I shall not presume to be
thorough or dogmatic where the greatest minds are still in the
dark.
The ills of poverty and of intemperance have this dilBerence :
that, however they may produce, exist with and aggravate
each other, the former are most frequently owing to causes
beyond the control of the sufferer ; while intemperance, by the
consumption of strong drink is a personal act for which, however great the temptation and strong the impulse, the individual is directly responsible. This statement is still true, although
the habit may at last become irresistible. The enslaved consumer sold himself and is therefore guilty of his own thralldom.
Poverty on the other hand is in most instances, not always of
course, the result of conditions which are beyond the control
of its victim. The great body of those who suffer for the
comforts of life neither elect nor create their condition. Nor
do they remain in it from lack of the same degree of desire
and effort to obtain comfort and competency which is manifest
169

170

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

on the part of those who are in less exacting circumstances.
It is unjust to demand, and useless to expect, of those who
have no accumulation of means, either inherited or otherwise
acquired, the exhibition of virtues which are not possessed by
others in more fortunate circumstances, when the sacrifice is
made from the absolute necessaries of life. If the poverty
be so great that the whole nature is constantly overtaxed,
there will be a strong tendency to purchase temporary relief
from mental horror and bodily exhaustion in the use of some
agency which has power to take one, for the moment at least,
out of the insufferable environment. Expenditures of this
nature constitute a cause of poverty that illustrates the tendency which any condition has to reproduce or increase itself,
and to create additional conditions which have like consequences. The long struggle for a competence, and, lacking
that, for a decent living, in which most human beings
engage, thwarted so often by accident, sickness, misfortune,
and sometimes by the absence of those inherent qualities ot
endurance, frugality and hope, which others possess and
which are a natural or acquired capital more necessary in the
battle of life than any other ; the innate desire to enjoy life
to some extent while living, if possible, and to escape from
its hardships when there ceases to be expectation of further
happiness in living, very often drives even a powerful mind
to despondency and, in a manner, compels the utilization of
surrounding temptations to avoid despair. To be sure the
remedy is worse than the disease, and there is no escape from
personal responsibility. The very constitution of society
compels us to hold every reasonable man responsible for
the natural consequences of his own act ; but we are speaking of causes, and the cause of intemperance and waste and
ruin in such a case as I am supposing, was expressed by the
inspired writer upon the labor question when he said that
the "destruction of the poor is their poverty." Nor does
the fall in these cases imply any want of equal strength and
merit of character compared with others who do not fail
because of difierent surroundings. Trifling things make or
mar our fortunes. Individuals are merged in, and controlled
l)y, the system of which they are a part. It is a wellaccredited fact that ninety per cent, of the merchants of our

PERSONAL

SUCCESS

IX

THE

LABOR

SYSTEM.

171

large cities become embarrassed in business during their
business lives. Their embarrassments as a rule do not imply
any less industry or economy than are exhibited by the few
who never have failed. The commercial system of the
country, and those other causes in the course of nature and
in general affairs by which the individual atom is controlled,
sweep him on to fortune or destruction. In a similar way
conditions which they did not create, and which they cannot
avoid, and from which they have never had the opportunity or
power to escape, cause and perpetuate the poverty of a large
proportion of the poor, and finally induce them to yield to
habits and vices which destroy all hope whatever. "While we
know that the average human being will succumb to these
surroundings, and that only systematic effort of the masses
and their gradual uplifting will remove these causes of poverty
— those deep and strong movements from within which elevate
humanity as the earthquake heaves up the mountain, or by
continual pressure lift the continent to its place — it still
remains true that the expenditure of the fruits of industry or
the idleness and destruction of the power to work itself, by
reason of any needless or vicious indulgence, has its evil consequences, and the individual and society must suffer so long
as he yields to its practice. AVhile I would not overlook the
responsibility of society at large for much of the want and
suffering which exist, still it remains true that whatever
remedy we get must come almost wholly from ourselves, and
each one will only add to his inevitable troul>les by the gratification ofany bad habit or propensity. So it has been, so it
will be ; and, whatever the excuse or the unavoidable cause,
the consequence will follow.
It is of little use then for us to complain of those consequences, the causes of which either are or have been of our
own making. There is no doubt that the amelioration of our
own condition is to a great extent under our own control,
and that we are ourselves a great and responsible part of that
very " society " whose aggregate power must apply the larger
and systematic remedies for evils in the life of the community as a whole. In a country like this he is a vagabond, indeed,
w^ho has not or may not make at least the opportunity for
honest work and frugal savins.
If he cannot save he need

172

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

not waste. And here, too, the poor man, the man of moderate means, can make the law, and the law is society in its
highest form of action.
It is idle for us to attribute the habit of intemperance to
any one but ourselves. Every man must make an effort in
this world, and if he fails in everything else he can at least
die conscious of having done his best. That consciousness is
itself victory. The old Athenian in his oration over the
tombs of those who had died for their country in battle
exclaimed : " What was the part of gallant men they all
performed. Their success was such as the Supreme Ruler
of events dispensed to each." So in the battle of life. Our
responsibility is for high endeavor, and ends there. But the
man who wastes his resources of body or of mind, or his
time or his money, or spends them for that which satisfieth
not, has no claim against fortune, and is in no condition to
prosecute society. He is his own curse and a curse to society
also, and especially to all those who depend upon their daily
labor for their daily bread. I was greatly impressed with
this fact by the testimony of a mechanic before the Senate
Committee, taken in the investigation upon the relations
between Labor and Capital.
The following is the official report of his testimony found
in Vol. III. of Report of Senate Committee on Education
and Labor, p. 251, in answer to questions proposed by
myself :
Manchester, N. H., October 15, 1883.
Alphonso Crosby examined by the Chairman :
Q. — Where do you reside?
A. — I reside in this city.
Q. — How long have you resided here?
A. — Thirteen years.
Q. — Have you had occasion to make any observations upon the
habits of the people here as to the use of intoxicating drinks ?
A. — I have.
The Chairman. — I understand you have some data, some statistics
or facts, which you can give us, so please proceed to do so in your
own way, with a view of showing the bearing of intemperance upon
the sufficiency of the wages received by working people for their labor.
The Witness. — I would only speak especially of it in my own line.
I am a carpenter.
I have worked at that business for forty-one years,

Benjamm R. Jewell,
Secretary Massachusetts Total Abstijie?ice Society.

LIQUOR

IN

THE

LABOR

PROBLEM.

173

and it has always been my study to advance the efficiency of journeymen carpenters. I was called here somewhat hurriedly, so that I have
not a fuU. opportunity of affording you actual information, but there is,
I think, among the carpenters about here, 25 per cent, that are total
abstainers, that do not drink at all ; those that drink moderately, and
that drink to excess, would make up the remainder. The habit is so
strong among a few that it injures all. We are actually working not
only in Manchester, but elsewhere — and I have taken pains to make
inquiry, and have had some experience in Chicago and Boston — and
I am convinced that nearly all mechanics are working to-day for the
prices established by the drinking men, because the drinking men are
improvident, and are obliged to sell their labor at the lowest figui'e,
and when there comes a pressure they have nothing to fall back upon
and so must go into the market, and those who have labor to buy will
of course buy it as cheaply as they can. There is another thing that
has had a tendency, as far as my experience has gone. Drinking men
have been at the bottom of strikes. I was once a member of a carpenter's association formed in 1861 or 1862 in Boston, and it was all
the sober men could do to keep the drinking men from a strike. We
had no strike, however ; we laid our case before the employers, and
they acceded to our demands readily without any trouble.
As far as the carpenters are concerned the employers and employees
have never been far apart in New England. When the employer has
an hour or two of leisure he takes off his coat and goes to work with
his journeymen, but the agitation of the labor question has tended to
push the employer and employee further apart, as I look upon it from
my stand-point, and the drinking habit is at the bottom of it. But I
think that we are, as a class here in Manchester, not troubled with
that as much as in most places in New England, with the exception of
Maine. In Maine whisky is not so easily obtained, and of course the
people are not annoyed by it as we are here and in some other places.
There is a great deal of perplexity caused among the employers by the
drinking men, who do not turn up as they ought to do after they have
been paid. Very often they do not put in their appearance for a day
or two. What the percentage of loss is I am not able to say, but I
know that in one shop, of which I had charge in Manchester, the men
left work on Saturday night, and the 4th of July came on Monday.
My crew didn't get to work before the next Monday. And my loss on
that job (which was a $3,000 job) was $50 then, and I judge, if I
lost as much as that, that other men doing a larger business must
suffer much greater than I did.
Q. — What is your observation upon the effect of the drinking habit
upon other classes of workmen in this city or elsewhere ?
A. — My observation is that when the habit becomes confirmed in a

174

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

man his advancement in any mechanical business is stopped. He does
not advance at all. He will either remain where he is or deteriorate.
Q. — Do you think this habit prevails to the extent of absorbing the
wages of the working people in the city ?
A. — Yes : my observation, of course, is limited, but at least there
is ten per cent, of the proceeds of labor in this city that goes for
alcoholic drinks. I think I am setting it quite low, but there is a
large number that do not drink at all.
Q. — You feel confident that ten per cent, of the entire wages earned
goes for drink?
A. — I do feel positive that ten per cent, of the entire wages earned in
Manchester goes for intoxicants.
Q. — Do you think that there is that proportion earned which is
deposited in the savings-banks ?
A. — Well, I could not say whether it is or not, but it may be more.
There are some that are very economical ; others spend the whole and
are continually in debt.
Q. — From your observation of wages paid labor in this city, during
the time you have lived in it, thirteen years, you say, is it or not your
judgment that it has been reasonably well paid — that is, to such an
extent as to give a good, fair, comfortable support, with the opportunity
of saving something for disability and old age ?
A. — ^Well, I think that the wages for labor have been reasonably
well paid here in Manchester ; during the pressure, during the hard
times as we call it, I think the wages here were rather in advance of
what they were in any of the cities around us. But since times got
better the wages of the carpenters have not come up here as elsewhere.
I know of no case where the habits have been good where they are not
comfortably well off, arid some are accumulating property.
Q. — Is there any other fact that occurs to you that you would like to
state.
A. — I don't know that there is.

The testimony of Mr. Crosby is that of one who knows the
very heart of labor because he is a toiler, an observer and a
thinker himself. But sometimes those of the best intentions
and utmost desire to be both virtuous and industrious are held
as in a vise. He who cannot stir must have help, and there
are many to whom a dollar, a lift, or even a smile or tear of
sympathy, is the very power of God.
It is inevitable that where laborers are classified, as must
be the case for many years, certainly until our generation
has lost all interest in economic questions, the rate of wages

COST

OF

LIVING

AND

DEIXKIXG.

1 < ,>

will he based on the rate received hy those who earn the least
in their class ; and, if it were not so, the better laborer would
be paying a part of his earnings to him who received more
than his due. The employer cannot pay for more work than
he receives in the aggregate, and continue to emplo}^ at all.
The result is that the unskillful, unreliable, thriftless and
dissipated, rob not themselves alone, but the whole mass of
toilers to which they belong. It may be said that this is an
evil of the wage system. So it may be. But the wage
system is a tremendous dominating fact and will be for years.
What Ave cannot remove we must adapt ourselves to until
we can, and there appears to me to be no doubt that intemperance and improvidence reduce largely the compensation of
the sober and industrious by enabling, if not by compelling,
the employer to adjust his scale of payment to the lowest,
rather than the highest, standard of efficiency. Payments by
the piece will obviate this to some extent, but such payments
are in the great mass of wage labor at present impossible.
The loss to diligent and skillful labor from this source is
incapable of computation, but it must be very great, and I
have no doubt it is one of the serious causes of inadequate
compensation to the mass of those whose M'ages are the
only means of their support.
This witness was an honest man of much intelligence and
experience. He was a practical man, whose knowledge was
not based so much upon figures, which sometimes make mistakes even if they never lie. I think that no one will question the truth of his observations. So far as the}'^ relate to
the city where he resides, I lielieve them to be quite within
the truth, although Manchester is one of the most industrious,
sober and prosperous cities in the country. There is another
thing which should be noted in regard to all statistics of averages and general estimates.
While they may be correct in showing the relation of the
facts concerned to the community or class as a whole, yet
they never depict the real state of the case. For instance,
to say that labor loses ten per cent, of its earnings by intemperance, conveys no correct idea of the real effect of the vice.
If only ten per cent, were thus wasted and the loss and consumption were divided equally among all, it would be vastly

176

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

better than the facts really are. But Mr. Crosby estimates
that twenty-five per cent, of the carpenters are total abstainers— they waste nothing of what they actually receive ; the
moderate drinkers spend comparatively little, and the great
loss and consequent want and misery fall chiefly upon the
remainder and their families, who are perhaps one fourth
of the whole. The evil thus concentrated results in starvation, squalor, disease, crime and misery, awful to contemplate as these actually exist. If we could divide all the
evils and sorrows of the world per capita, and work or sufier
out our misery in equal parts daily, it might be endurable ;
and if along with this community of sorrows there could be a
community in joys, regardless of the relations between cause
and efiect, perhaps the equal division of evil and good would
leave us each a tolerable existence. Statistics of averages
seem to be based upon some such Utopian thought. But
there is no such equalization of happiness and misery. There
is a logic — a progression from cause to effect, extending
through the generations and so on to a conclusion^ which is
heaven or hell. We do not rest in equilibrium or on a horizontal plane. The movements of individual humanity are
upward or downward, and the end, whatever it may be, is a
logical result of his own deeds, or those of his ancestors,
visited upon every responsible being.
Who then shall undertake to depict the terrible consequences of the investment of ten per cent, of the earnings of
labor in these poison drinks? Men ruined, women worse
than ruined, fathers and mothers heart-broken and crushed,
husbands and wives alienated, brutalized, grief-stricken,
crime-stricken, wretchedness, despair and death despoiling
domestic love and destroying Jiome — the very synonym of
heaven ; children birth-cursed, life-cursed, struggling up
through the ban of society which buries the hapless innocents
— ^victims of its own negligence and wrongs — under the heavy
frown of humiliation and disgrace, all culminating in burdens
too grievous to be borne, and weighing down the bent back
of the body politic itself.
There are 332 manufacturing industries enumerated in the
tenth census of the United States. The amount of capital
employed is $2,790,272,606 ; the number of laborers employed

WASTED

WAGES.

177

is 2,732,595 ; the total amount of wages paid for the year,
$947,953,795; the total value of materials, $3,396,823,549;
the total value of products at wholesale price, $5,369,579,191.
Labor is 17.65 per cent, of the wholesale price, or a little more
than one sixth.
The number of hands employed includes those who are engaged in the manufacture of liquors of all kinds, 33,689.
These industries do not include agriculture, mining, commerce, trade, transportation, printing, telegraphy, professional nor common laborers, personal or household servants,
etc., or scientific labor of any kind. They do, however,
include trades and occupations among which the hardships of
poverty are perhaps as severely felt as in any, and among
which there is an average per capita consumption of alcoholic
drinks.
These 2,732,595 of our fellow-citizens include 531,369
women over 15 years of age, and 181,921 children and
youths, in all 713,290, so that there remain male workmen
over 16 years of age, 2,019,035. If wages were equally divided among all these individuals, the average yearly earning or
wages would be $346. If the estimate of Mr. Crosby be substantially correct, these 2,732,595 Avorkers would invest
ten per cent, of their wages in intoxicating beverages or
$94,795,379. The increase of population since 1880 is not less
than 10,000,000 or twenty per cent, of 50,000,000, which is
a little less than the population in 1880. At the same rate of
expenditure the same classes of our population would now
spend of their wages $104,274,916. As only 2,019,035 are
men, or say in round numbers 2,000,000, of whom probably
500,000 are total abstainers, 1,000,000 of the remainder moderate drinkers, and 500,000 those who drink to a greater or
less degree of excess — then if we allow $4,274,916 to be the
total amount consumed by women and children, which is no
doubt too much, it will be probably as correct an estimate as
can be made, to say that the 1,500,000 men consume $69 or
$70 each annually of their earnings for alcoholic drinks.
It can hardl}^ be too much to say that $50,000,000, or one
half the amount of alcohol, is consumed by those who use it
to excess, of whom we estimate there are 500,000 men, giving an expenditure of SlOO yearly for this class, and $50 per
12

178

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

year by the moderate drinker. Now the man who drinks
one hundred dollars worth of alcohol yearly will lose so much
time in consequence thereof, and will fail as a worker in so
many ways, that, as a rule, he will not more than earn the
liquor which he consumes and that man really becomes a dead
weight upon his family, if he has one, and upon the community if he has not, or more likely both man and family
become a public burden. Unless he reforms, it becomes,
economically considered, a matter of little importance how
soon he vanishes from the scene of his indulgence. From
them, and such as they, graduate the thousands who fall
victims to the destroyer, and although their ranks are more
than decimated yearly, yet they are renewed forever from the
constantly degenerating ranks of the moderate drinkers who
are steadily traveling the same downward road.
It is said that the indirect losses to the country from the
traffic are equal to the direct, and I think no one can candidly
say that the estimate is too high — but if we calculate the
consumption of all who are engaged in what are termed the
"gainful" occupations upon the same basis of the consumption of ten per cent, of their earnings in alcoholic drinks, we
shall find these estimates very moderate.
The money paid by the consumer for intoxicating drink in
the United States is variously estimated at from $600,000,000
to $900,000,000 yearly. Mr. Edward Atkinson, the eminent
writer upon political economy, and Mr. F. JST. Barrett, the
distinguished editor of the New York Grocer, estimate the
sum at $700,000,000, and arrive at their conclusions in
different ways. Neither of these gentlemen would be likely
to overestimate the amount and it is probably at least
$150,000,000 too low.
The careful estimates we have already given with those of
Mr. Atkinson and Mr. Barrett more than confirm the moderate per cent, adopted by Mr. Crosby, who had come to his
conclusions by constant study and close observation of men
and things around him for fifteen years. Notwithstanding
the clamor of those whose living depends upon being paid for
systematically destrojdng their fellow-men, protected therein
by the guilty co-operation of society at large, that "temperance statistics" are exaggerated beyond fable, there is no

THE

PROBLEM

CONSIDERED.

179

way to escape the terrible conviction that they are too small.
If they are to any extent unreliable, those who complain
have but themselves to blame, because for twelve years or more
these temperance " fanatics " have been beseeching Congress
for an impartial commission to serve the public without personal reward and to be composed of representatives of the
liquor tratfic, as well as of its accusers, to inquire into the
whole subject-matter under discussion. Six times at least
has the bill for this purpose passed the Senate and as often
has it been defeated by the direct opposition of the liquor interest in the House of Keprcsentatives.
Indeed the continual defeat of the " Alcoholic Enquiry Commission Bill" has been one of the chief glories which has
blossomed around the head of the astute and sleepless
gentleman who for many sessions has so ably guarded the
den of King Alcohol against all illumination by the torch of
truth. But to continue: Dr. Hargreaves, who is, I believe,
reliable and correct in his estimates on this important matter, fixes the aggregate amount paid directly for alcoholic
beverages, during the ten years from 1875 to 1886, inclusive,
at the enormous sum of $7, 809, 815, 615. The average for
the first five years, $675,080,460. The annual average for
the second five years, $886,882,662, and the annual average
for the ten years, $780,981,561. I am satisfied that even this
is too low, but it is infinitely more than the imagination
can comprehend, and in these vast accounts the diiference
of a hundred millions more or less is not really within our
grasp. It is there, however, all the same, and works death
to thousands with unfailing certainty.
If to these payments for liquor consumed be added what are
called indirect losses, such as waste of time and vitality, disorganization ofproductive forces, to support paupers, criminals, administer and execute the laws, destruction of valuable
materials and perversion of capital and labor from useful pursuits, loss by premature death of victims annually, to say
nothing of impaired vitality and productive powers, the
destruction of infant life, and other causes, the aggregate
must be more than doubled. Eev. Charles H. Zimmerman
says, from elaborate calculation, it becomes more than quadrupled or $4,000,000,000 annually.
(See Union Signal, June 16, 1887.)

180

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

The wage workers of the country are not its most intemperate and wasteful citizens ; and the amelioration of their
state by securing better conditions of toil, with the opportunity to work brought within reach of all ; reasonable
hours, well-ventilated and healthful lodgings, good and nutritious food, opportunities for reading, lectures and other forms
of intellectual improvement and entertainment ; occasional
recreation with kindly personal intercourse and recognition of
the common humanity which exists between all classes, and
especially by the exhibition of good feeling on the part of
employers and managers, which is sure to be gratefully reciprocated, is,in my belief, the first step and most efficient
means, next to the destruction of the liquor itself, of removing the poverty which comes from intemperance. But if the
liquor did not exist the temptation would not exist, and the
surroundings of the toiler being rendered comfortable the
disposition to save would assert itself, and from the waste
of the present our wage-working people, in ten years, could
banish all distressing poverty. The saving of seventy dollars
a year now wasted by each adult laborer, or of fifty even,
would give general relief. It is, however, impossible to
'expect anything of the kind so long as the appetite exists, the
liquor is made, and the law and public opinion, or public indifference, which is the same thing, permit the present conditions to continue. Some force outside those who are the
victims must intervene. Difierent conditions must be established bythose who already have the power. These people
need the hand of their big brother who is already better off.
Society as a whole must bind up the wounds of its members,
and the chief remedy will be to give the opportunity of selfhelp by removing temptation to waste and vice with the arm
of the law.
While on this point, however, I wish further to observe
that the close competition of the times has already reduced
wages so low that only by strict economy can the average
worker support himself and family in even the coldly comfortable supply of the wants which our higher civilization has
developed. There is very little chance for him to save, no
matter how economical he may be, unless he have also income
from the earnings of wife and child.

Heni^y'■•of H.
Faxon,
Qiiincyr

"WAGE

OF

THE

AVERAGE

WORICEE.

181

Mr. Atkinson estimates the wa^e of the averasje worker at
$450 per year. I do not think he actually realizes more than
$300 or at most $350. Many get more, many others less,
and here cornes in again this wicked, misleading average —
but it is the way folks theorize, so let us go on with it.
Mr. George E. McNeill, the eminent industrial student and
leader, the author of that timely and valuable work, "The
Labor Movement," in a letter recently published, gives the
items of expense in the family of an intelligent workman as
shown by his accounts. Replying to some one who proposes
economy as the only remedy required for the ills of life, he
says:
Our correspondent's next remedy is economy. Next to the word
liberty, no more sins have been committed in any one name than
in that of economy. The average wages of labor in tliis state are not
enough to furnish the necessities of our civilized conditions. Let us
examine an example of the proper expenditure of money, as shown
from the accounts kept by an intelligent workingman.
Here is a family of four persons, living in their own house : Groceries cost S158.07 ; provisions, §96. 25 ; vegetables, $15.57 ; clothing,
$142. G8 ; fuel, $49 ; liglit, $5.40 ; furniture, $3.G8 ; education. $1.85 ;
sickness, $12.G2 ; charity, $2.50; religion, $2.40; newspapers and
periodicals, $11.30 ; total, $501.42.
To these expenses must be added the following : Ilair-cutting, 00c. ;
freight on tool-chest, $3 ; dentistry, $3.50 ; toilet articles, $2.40 ;
Christmas and bridal presents, $9.25 ; amusements, $1.42 ; repairing
clock, wringer and stove, $4.05 ; water bill, $8 ; tools, $10.23 ; boy
boarding in country twotweeks, $5 ; balance on sewing-machine,
$31 ; taxes, $44 ; repairs on house, $20.12 ; interest on mortgage,
$40 ; total, $185.57, or agrand total of expense for one year of $080.99.
To these should be added expenditures for recreation and travel, and
meals away from home when at work at a distance. No family should
live any more economical than this. The food costs about 18 cents
per day for each person. The clothing $35.50 each for the year.
The taxes, water rates, repairs, etc., are equivalent to $118.12 for
rent, or with the interest on the valuation less the mortgage, $238.12.
I have given these figures that our economic friends may see that the
total expenses of this family, covering as they do only the needed things
of a civilized life, are at least $300 more than the average annual
earnings of wage workers.
I quite concur with those who believe that there are many
causes of poverty beside intemperate drinking, smoking and

182

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

the like. But 1113^ point is that, on the other hand, interaperanee alone must be a great, I thmk the greatest, subtraction
from the actual earnings of the producer — earnings at best
hardly sufficient for the comfortable support of a femily — and
this loss is something that might be saved, and either laid
up for a rainy day or expended at once for necessity or for
rational enjoyment.
Look over that table of expenditures. Who can demand
them to be smaller unless he does so from the impulses of a brutal nature ? But when you subtract $50 or $100 for rum — ^then
take out further from the earnings the value of the time, sure,
sooner or later, to be lost as a consequence of the dissipation
and deterioration which the poison will inevitably produce,
and then consider the years of helpless age in the future, as
well as of sickness and accident in the family during the years
of active life, you can imagine something of the havoc which
any deleterious and expensive habit will work in the wage
laborer's life.
By the census of 1880, 34.68 percent, of the entire population are classed under the "gainful" occupations, viz. :
Agriculture, professional and personal services, trade and
transportation, manufjicturing, mechanical and mining industries— or a total of 17,392,099 persons who are supposed to
be productively employed ; so that those engaged in manufacturing industries in 1880 were a little less than one sixth of the
entire population engaged in gainful occupations. If, as
we calculated above, the former now expend $104,274,916
yearly for alcoholic beverages, the entire amount now expended by all engaged in gainful occupations would be
obtained by multiplying that sum by 6^, making $760,407,801.
Dr. Hargreave's annual average was $886,882,662 for the
whole population from 1881 to 1886 inclusive.
As the luxurious and spendthrift and dependent, defective,
criminal, non-producing classes are not included in our calculation, there would remain $125,374,861 to be consumed by
them for intoxicating beverages, which is probably below the
real amount. I consider this a remarkable confirmation of
the probable correctness of the estimate of ten per cent, of
the earnings of the productive classes being now expended
du'ectly for intoxicating drinks ; and even the estimates of

MR. powderly's

letter.

183

Mr. Atkinson and Mr. Barrett reduce the result in but a
*
slight degree.
The eloquent and impassioned words of Mi-. Powderly,
Master Workman of the Knights of Labor, upon the subject
of this chapter are l)efore me. "Faithful are the wounds of a
friend."
They save life and heal without a scar.
This letter deserves immortality, and I ^vill do what I can
to extend its influence. If the rich drone spends his money
for that which is naught, and his labor for that which satisfieth
not, he is Avasting substance which is not required l)y those
dependent upon him, and by his dissipation is destroying a
useless life. But the demon who robs the American laborer
of his time, money, health and life starves and kills brokenhearted women and innocent little ones, unless, perchance, still
more unfortunate, they survive to sufler the prolonged miseries
of the drunkard's home and an inheritance of disgrace. And
the worker is the nation. Preserve him and the nation is
perpetual.
If wrong, we must advise him — admonish him — if need be,
oftend him — at all hazards we must save him, or rather he
must save himself. The law has no exceptions ; all who are
saved work out their own salvation.
In the Journal of United Labor ^ July 2, 1887, Mr.
Powderly says :
Among the letters that came to me to-day I find one from an old
friend, Avho takes me to task for my words on the temperance question,
spoken some ten or twelve days ago in Boston and Lynn.
He says :
" In the main you are right, even the rum-seller himself will not
deny the justice of your position, but remember that in the very organization ofAvhich you are the head there are many good men who drink ;
there are thousands who will not agree with you, and after all why do
you so bitterly arraign the poor drunkard ? It is not required of you
by the Constitution or laws of the Knights of Labor. You could well
afford to remain silent or at least neutral, preferring to teach rather
by example than precept, etc
I very much fear that you wUl
be misunderstood, etc."
My friend makes the candid admission, in starting out, that in the
main I am right, that even the rum-seller will not deny the justice of
my position. Having said as much he should have stopped — even then
he told me nothing new. I know that I am right ; I know that in
refusing to even touch a drop of strong drink I was, and am, right.

184

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

In refusing to treat another to that which I do not believe to be good
for myself to drink, I know I am right.^ In refusing to associate with
men who get drunk, I know I am right. In not allowing a rum-seller
to gain admittance into the Order of the Knights of Labor, I know I
am right. In advising our Assemblies not to rent halls or meeting
rooms over drinking places, I know I am right. I have done this
from the day my voice was first heard in the council halls of our Order.
My position on the question of temperance is right — I am determined
to maintain it, and will not alter it one jot or tittle. If, " in the main "
lam right, why should I alter my course? If the man who sells
liquor will "not deny the justice" of my position, why should I deviate to the right or left? If he will not deny, why should he not admit
that I am right ? I know that in the organization of which I am the
head there are many good men who drink, but they would be better
men if they did not drink. I know that there are thousands in our
Order who will not agree with me on the question of temperance, but
that is their misfortune, for they are wrong, radically wrong.
Ten years ago I was hissed because I advised men to let strong drink
alone. They threatened to rotten-egg me. I have continued to advise
men to be temperate, and though I have had no experience that would
qualify me to render an opinion on the efiicacy of a rotten egg as an
ally of the. rum drinker, yet I would prefer to have my exterior decorated from summit to base with the rankest kind of rotten eggs rather
than allow one drop of liquid villany to pass my lips, or have fhe end
of my nose illuminated by the blossom that follows a planting of the
seeds of hatred, envy, malice and damnation, all of which are represented in a solitary glass of gin.
Ten years ago the cause of temperance was not so respectable as it
is to-day, because there was not so many respectable men and women
advocating it. It has gained ground ; it is gaining ground, and all
because men and women who believe in it could not be brow-beaten or
frightened. Neither the hissing of geese nor serpents nor the throwing
of rotten eggs has stopped or even delayed the march of temperance
among the workers.
"Why do I so bitterly arraign the poor drunkard?" For the
reason that he is a drunkard, and because he has made himself poor
through his love of drink. Did I, or any other man, rob him of the
money he has squandered in drink ? Did I make him poor ? The vilest
names that tongue can frame would he apply to me. Must I stand
idly by and remain silent while he robs himself ? Did he rob only himself it would not make so much difference. He robs parents, wife and
children. He robs his aged father and mother through love of drink.
He gives for rum what should go for their support. When they murmur he turns them from his door, and points his contaminated drunken

ME. PO%\'T)EELY's

lettee.

185

finger toward the poor-house. He next turns toward his wife and robs
her of what should be devoted to the keeping of her home in comfort
and plenty. He robs her of her -wedding ring and pawns it for di-ink.
He turns his daughter from his door in a fit of drunken anger and
drives her to the house of prostitution, and then accepts from her hand
the proceeds of her shame. To satisfy his love of drink he takes the
price of his child's virtue and innocence from her sin-stained, lustbejeweled fingers, and with it totters to the bar to pay it to the man
who " does not deny the justice of my position." I do not arraign the
man who drinks because he is poor, but because thi-ough being a slave
to drink he has made himself and family poor. I do not hate theman who drinks, for I have carried drunken men to their homes on
my back rather than allow them to remain exposed to inclement
weather. I do not hate the drunkard — he is what drink has effected ;
and while I do not hate the effect I abhor and loathe the cause.
Take the list of labor societies of America, and the total sum paid
into their treasuries from all sources from their organization to the
present time will not exceed §5,000,000. The Knights of Labor is
the largest and most influential of them all ; and though so much has
been said concerning the vast amount of money that has been collected
from the members, yet the total sum levied and collected for all
purposes — per capita tax, Journal, assistance fund, appeals, assessment, insurance and co-operation — up to the present time will not exceed $800,000.
The total sum collected for the first nine years of the existence of
the General Assembly was but $500,725.14. In nine years less than
$600,000 were collected to uplift humanity to a higher plane, and to
bring the workers to a realizing sense of tlieii* actual condition in lite.
It took less than $600,000 to teach the civilized world that workingmen could build up an organization that could shed such light upon
the doings of landlords, bondlords, monopolists and other trespassers
on the domain of popular rights that they were forced to halt for a time
and stand up to explain. Less than $600,000 (not a dollar unaccounted for) , and on the statute books of the nation will you find the
impress of the workman's hand. On the law book of every state can
be traced the doing of labor's representatives. Less than $600,000 to
turn the batteries of greed and avarice against the Order of the Knights
of Labor. Less than $600,000 to create a revolution greater, further
reaching in its consequences and more lasting in its benefits, than the
revolution Avhich caused the streets of the towns and cities of France to
run red with human blood less than a century ago. Less than $600,000
to make men feel and believe that woman's work should equal that of the.
man. Less than $600,000 to educate men and women to believe that
" moral worth and not wealth is the true standard of individual and

186

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Bational greatness." Less than $600,000 to cause every newspaper in the
land to speak of the work being done by the Knights of Labor — some of
them speaking in abusive terms, others speaking words of praise,
according to the interests represented by the papers or according as the
work done harmonized with the principles of the Order. For paying
less than $600,000 the members of the Knights of Labor have been
told that they were being robbed. In one day an employer's association organizes and pledges itself to contribute $5,000,000 to fight labor.
The next day the papers are almost silent on that point, but are filled
to the brim with lurid accounts of the reckless autocratic manner in
which the ofiicers of the Knights of Labor levy a twenty-five-cent
assessment to keep over 100,000 locked-out men and women from
starvation. Putting two and two together, it is not hard to guess why
papers that applauded the action of the employers in one column
should in another column advise the workers not to pay the twenty-five€ent assessment ;— $600,000 for sobermen to use in education and selfimprovement.
Now let us turn to the other side. In the city of New York alone
it is estimated that not less than $250,000 a day are spent for drink.
$1,500,000 in one week ; $75,000,000 in one year. Who will dispute
it when I say that one half of the policemen of New York city are
employed to watch the beings who squander $75,000,000 a year? Who
will dispute it when I say that the money spent in paying the salaries
and expenses of one half of the police of New York could be saved to
the taxpayers if $75,000,000 were not devoted to making drunkards,
thieves, prostitutes and other subjects for the policemen's net to gather
in? If $250,000 go over the counters of the rum-seller in one day in
New York city alone, who will dare to assert that workingmen do not
pay one fifth, or $50,000, of that sum? If workingmen in New York
city spend $50,000 a day for drink, they spend $300,000 a week,
leaving Sunday out. In four weeks they spend $1,200,000 — over
twice as much money as was paid into the General Assembly of the
Knights of Labor in nine years. In six weeks they spend $1,800,000
— nearly three times as much money as that army of organized workers,
the Knights of Kabor, have spent from the day the General Assembly
was first called to order up to the present day ; and in one year the
workingmen of New York city alone will have spent for beer and rum
$15,600,000 or enough to purchase and equip a first-class telegraph
line of their own: — $15,600,000 — enough money to invest in such
co-operative enterprises as would forever end the strike and lock-out
as a means of settling disputes in labor circles.
A single county in Pennsylvania, so I am informed, spent in one
year $17,000,000 for drink. That county contains the largest industrial population, comparatively, of any in the state :— $11,000,000 of

ME. poavdeely's lettee.

187

the $17,000,000 come from the pockets of workingmen. New York
city, in one year, contributes ^15,600,000 to keep men and women in
poverty, hunger and cold, while one county in Pennsylvania adds
$11,000,000, making a total of $26,600,000. Twenty-six million six
hundred thousand dollars ! I have a conundrum to ask of you, Mr.
Purdy : If the General Officers of the Knights of Labor are thieves because they levy an assessment Avhich brings in less than a dollar apiece
for each man, woman and child who needs it, what would you call the
men who collect as a voluntary gift from foolish workingmen the sum
of $26,600,000 in one year?
The press, and not a few indignant workingmen, raved because the
twenty-five-cent assessment Avas levied ; but both press and indignant workingmen remained silent while that damnable robbery of
$26,600,000 was going on. Who arraigns the poor drunkard now?
Does he not arraign himself before the bar of condemnation every time
he ranges himself before the bar in a rum hole ?
The Richmond session of the General Assembly voted $50,000 to
purchase headquarters for the Order ;— $45,000 went to buy the building on Broad street, Philadelphia. For complying with the order of
the General Assembly the General Officers have been abused and slandered most villainously, principally by men who never contributed a
cent toward the purchase of the building. The enemies of the Order,
or of the Officers of the Order, have styled the headquarters " The
Palace." On another street in the city of Philadelphia there is a saloon
called " The Palace." I inquired of the proprietor what it cost him
and he said $20,000. Nine years ago he began business, selling rum,
on a capital of $73, and in that time he has acquired the money with
■which to purchase the building and the lot on Avhich it stands. He
also owns $50,000 in railroad securities — all on an original cash capital of $73. His patrons are chiefly workingmen. Why do we not
hear a protest go up against the means by which that palace was
erected ?
" It is not required of you by the Constitution or laws of the Knights
of Labor." I know it. Neither is it stated in the Constitution of the
Order that I shall not stand on the public highway and rob the passer-by,
yet I know that I should not do such a thing. If I saw a man about
to hang himself, the Constitution does not specify that I should cut the
rope.
" You could well aiford to remain silent or at least neutral, prefering to teach by example rather than precept." If I cared more for the
praise and approbation of labor's enemies than I do for the interest of
labor I would remain silent. The man who remains neutral while his
friend is in the grasp of the enemy, or while his friend is in danger, is
£L coward at heart and does not deserve the name of man or friend.

188

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Remain silent and neutral while the house is on fire and you have
nothing left but blackened, defaced walls and — ashes.
Teach by example? I cannot in so large a country as this. If my
example is good, then my words should proclaim it to the world. I
am no better than other men, but the virtue of temperance is good,
even in a bad man, and that is what I wish to hold up before our members and workingmen outside of our Order.
" I very much fear that you will be misunderstood." Do not fear ;
I will not be misunderstood when this letter is read. I am not a
fanatic. I do not damn the man who sells liquor. I have nothing
against him. Many men who now sell liquor were once workingmen
and were victimized through a strike or lock-out. I would not injure
a hair of their heads, but I would so educate workingmen that they
would never enter a saloon. Then the money saved from rum and
rum holes would go to purchase necessaries, and such an increased
stimulus would be given to trade that the rum-seller could return to an
honest way of making a living.
I may be taken to task for being severe on the workingmen. It
may be said that I slander them even. If to tell the truth is to be
severe, then on this one question I hope some day to be severity itself;
but I speak to workingmen because it is in their welfare that I am
interested. I have not been delegated to watch or guard the fortunes
of millionaires, and in no way can I hope to accomplish anything until
I state my policy freely and frankly to those I represent. We are
seeking to reform existing evils.
We must first reform ourselves.
Some mischievous urchins once found a man sleeping by the roadside. They procured some soot and blackened his face. When he
awoke and went into the crowded street every man he met laughed at
him. He did not learn the cause of the merriment until a friend held
a mirror up before him. He became very mad, and for a time felt
angry toward the man who held the mirror ; but he soon came to his
senses, laid the blame where it properly belonged, and thanked the man
who showed him why others ridiculed him. I am holding the mirror
up to human nature. True, it exposes folly and vice. I may and do
receive condemnation, but if I can only show the men I speak to wha
it is that is blackening their faces, characters and hearts ; if I can only
show them how to remove the stains and become sober men again, I
will be content to put up with their anger, for I know that they will
one day thank me or bless my memory for the words I have spoken
and written in the cause of temperance.
T.

V.

POWDERLT.

I will cite the testimony of one professional witness given
before the Senate Committee in reply to my questions, discuss-

STATEIVIENTS

OF DR.

STOW.

189

ing very intelligently the causes of poverty. The strong and
evident sympathy of the witness with people who are manual
laborers gives to this testimony peculiar importance. It was
taken by the committee at the request of honorable Robert
Howard, and I ask attention to it as containing much food for
thought, and, as it seems to me, also ground for action. Fall
River is, as is well known, one of the chief manufacturing
cities of the country, and the statements of Dr. Stow, must
be taken to be the general result where like conditions prevail :
Boston, Mass., October 18, 1883.
Dr. Timothy D, Stow examined by the Chairman :
Question. — You are a physician?
Answer. — Yes.
Q.— You live at Fall River?
A. — Yes.
Q. — "Won't you state how you happen to appear before the committee, what your object is in coming here, and at whose request you
come, and then give us the benefit of any observations you choose to
lay before us ?
A. — Mr. Robert Howard, of our city, called on me yesterday, and
desired me to appear here to-day before your conmiittee to give whatever testimony I could, relating particularly to the physical and
mental, and perhaps the moral, condition of the operatives and laboring classes of Fall River. I have made no notes, and I hardly know
Avhat your plan is ; but I would as soon answer questions as to make
any detailed statement.
The Chairman. — "We want to find out how the working people of
Fall River are living and doing ; you can tell us that in the way in
which one gentleman would talk to another, the one understanding the
subject and the other not understanding it. Just tell us the condition
of the operatives there in your own way, bearing in mind that we
would rather have it without premeditation than as a prepared statement.
The "Witness. — I have been in Fall River about eleven years,
though I have been one year absent during that time. As a physician
and surgeon, of course, I have been brought into close contact with all
classes of people there, particularly the laboring classes, the operatives
of the city.
"With regard to the eifect of the present industrial system upon their
physical and moral welfare, I should say it was of such a character
as to need mending, to say the least.
It needs some radical remedy.

190

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Our laboring population is made up very largely of foreigners, meny
women and children, who have either voluntarily come to Fall River,
or who have been induced to come there by the manufacturers. As a
class they are dwarfed physically. Of course, there are exceptions to
that ; some notable ones. On looking over their condition and weighing itas carefully as I have been able to, I have come to the conclusion
that the character and quality ot the labor which they have been doingin times past, and most of them from childhood up, has been, and is,
such as to bring this condition upon them slowly and steadily. They
are dwarfed, in my estimation, sir, as the majority of men and women
who are brought up in factories must be dwarfed under the present
industrial system ; because by their long hours of in-door labor and
their hard work they are cut off from the benefit of breathing fresh air,
and from the sights that surrbund a workman outside a mill.
Being shut up all day long in the noise and in the high temperature of
these mills, they become physically weak. Then most of them are
obliged to live from hand to mouth, or, at least, they do not have
sufficient food to nourish them as they need to be nourished. These
things, together with the fact that they have to limit their clothingsupply — this constant strain upon the operative — all tend to make him
upon the one hand uneasy and restless, or on the other hand to
produce discouragement and recklessness. They make him careless in
regard to his own condition. All these things combined tend to
produce what we have in Fall River.
Now, first, as to the moral condition of the operatives of Fall River,
I think so far as crime is concerned we have quite as little crime there
as in any city of its size. We have a population rising on 50,000.
There is a disposition at times, and under certain pressure, for some
operatives to violate the law, to pilfer, or something of that kind, and
I think it grows out of not what is called " pure cussedness," but a
desire to relieve some physical want. For instance, a man wants a
coat and has not the means of earning it, and he is out of employment
and being pinched with the cold and with no prospects of getting
employment, or of getting a coat by honest means, he steals one. Or
perhaps he steals food on the same principle.
But, so far as crime is concerned, we have comparatively little.
But what I do say, and what has been on my mind ever since I came
to Fall River, with reference to operatives there, is the peculiar impress
they seem to bear, a sort of dejected, tired, worn-out, discouraged
appearance, growing out of bad influence of long hours of labor, the
close confinement of the mills, the din of the machinery, their
exclusion from social intercourse, except at night.
And I think we can look for a solution of the problem which the
country at large is endeavoring to solve — that with reference to the

Miss Amta
Associated with Miss

Gordo7t,
Willard.

TNTIY

THEY

DKINK.

191

intemperate habits of the laboring classes and the operatives — in those
facts that I have mentioned. I have questioned many thoughtful men
and women in regard to that. I have said : " Why is it that at night
particularly you frequent the dram shops ? "Why is it that by day you
di'ink ; that you store enough even for the day in your houses ? " The
answer is : " Well, doctor, I tell you the fact is this : there is a sense
of fatigue over us which we do not know how to overcome, and
which we must overcome for the time being, if we are to have any of
the social qualities of an evening, and we can't do it without taking
something which will bridge over the time and make us equal to
the emergency of the evening or the occasion." For instance, the
operative being in the mill all day long comes out at night, and it is
the only time he has, unless he uses Sunday — and he uses that largely
— in which to visit his friends, who are scattered here and there all
over the city. Families are, of course, scattered in that way. They
are either brought over here by the manufacturer, or come of their
own accord. One person finds a place in one mill, and another in
another mill. They have no means of communication with each other
except at night, or on a Sunday. Noav they say to themselves, " How
can we fit ourselves for this social intercourse — v/hat we deem a
necessity? " The result is that a man steps into a lager beer saloon,
or often into a place where he gets stronger liquor, and he takes a glass
of it, and in a few minutes he begins to feel the stimulating influence
of the liquor, and it braces him up. But I have said: "How does
this make you feel ? You say you have been feeling fatigued in the
evening and discouraged ; that your future does not look bright ; how
do you feel when you get the liquor?" "Why," he will say,
" it covers that all up ; we lose all thought of that, and for the time
being we feel well." And so they go on from day to day, and from
night to night.
Now, after all, I do not know of many drunkards in Fall River, but
this is true : the operative spends his five, ten, fifteen or twenty-five
cents a night for liquor, and it is so much money lost to him, and yet
he feels impelled to it, because he does not know how otherwise to
adapt himself to the circumstances of the evening. It does not seem
to affect his constitution, and most of them keep up pretty well, but
some succumb to it. Others who cannot succumb to the influences of
lager beer often resort to stronger liquors, such as brandy, whisky
and so on, to stimulate them more, because they require more and
more to keep up the effect. Those go down to the drunkard's grave.
I should say that the average man there who reaches that condition
gets to be a pauper at thirty-five or forty. The women, particularly
the English women, brew their own beer to some extent, but they buy
largely of the stores, and keep beer in their houses for the day.
It is

192

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

-a, common thing for these bar -keepers to peddle around beer and ale,
to leave from half a dozen to a dozen of ale a week at a house.
Almost every Saturday some families will put in from a dozen to two
dozen bottles of ale.
Now, it is invariably the testimony of the more intelligent men and
women in answer to the question, " Why do you persist in drinking? "
' ' It makes us feel better ; we are relieved of the ennui of life ; we are
relieved of mental depression for the time being, and after the evening's social engagements are over we get home and go to bed, and
think nothing of it, and next day resume our day's work." And so
it goes on from day to day.
In considering this testimony in connection with that of
Mr. Crosby and other facts now before us, one is reminded of
Agur's prayer : "Give me neither poverty nor riches." Both
are causes of intemperance, and intemperance being a waste of
health and strength must cause poverty — for what is poverty ?
It is the absence of health, strength, and the ordinary comforts of life. Intemperance takes all these away — and it
increases poverty already existing. Poverty does not create
intemperance by any direct act. Intemperance is the direct
act.
Poverty creates by distress an abnormal state of mind and
body, and in that condition the act of intemperance takes
place. It is always the act with which we deal, and that is
where we stop in the enforcement of responsibility — poverty
and wealth are both indirect causes of intemperance as they
are of theft and of waste — and behind these conditions are
still deeper causes — rooted in human nature and our surroundings, which it is the struggle of evolution to remove and escape
from — the limitations and tendencies and influences of human
nature, and of all nature, in the past and in the present.
Of all the direct acts which we can perform or avoid for
the removal of poverty or of the acquisition of comfort, competency and wealth, the drinking of intoxicating liquors is the
worst, and for it we are responsible, because it is an act of
volition.
But our saving will only help, it will not solve the labor
problem. Abolish intoxication and there will be more dollars, but even then the sober man will not always get the
dollar.
The problem of the distribution of labor as well as

THE GREAT

MOVEMENTS,

ONE GEEAT

MOVEMENT.

193

of production remains. And wlio sliall protect and maintain
the unfortunate? Alas, my brother! — Society has not yet
learned its duty — far less performed it. In the future — in
the good time coming — there will be no such word as charity.
When charity is swallowed up in duty, then shall be revealed
the glory of the latter days.
Society has a perpetual life. The knowledge and experience of the ages accumulate and proceed with the successive generations. In this larger field of action — the action
of society — there is a responsibility for wealth and poverty
and intemperance, vice and crime, w^hich cannot be escaped
from, and as members of the perpetual corporation of
humanity, we must discover and remove those ultimate
causes of human suflering which come from poverty of the
many or extravagance of the luxurious few. To secure this,
wealth, the means of supplying proper human wants, must
be created, and then must be distributed where the wants
exist. To efl'ect this creation and distribution as it should be
done is the great unsolved problem of "Labor," of which the
Temperance Reform is one of the most important factors. In
a great war, first one l)attle and then another is for the time
being the most important thing to be done. The Temperance
Reform is one of these great battles. "We must win our
Bunker Hill, and our Saratoga, or we shall fail at Yorktown. The Labor movement, the Temperance Reform,
Popular Education, Moral and Religious instruction, the making and the administration of good laws, are all parts of one
great movement and are indispensable to each other. It is
useless to quibble and make wry faces like children on the
street, and say each to the other, "I'm the biggest," and
"You're a fool." The progress of the world is a battle — a
great game in which we play with the team and interchanging our parts, and, so far as God gives us powder, in all ways
for the good of all mankind.
Let all unite, and put forth the utmost efibrt in union with
others, in every direction of helpful effort. We are trying to
put down the original rebellion of the fallen angels which has
broken out, and has raged fearfully in this old world of oui's,
Lo ! now at least six thousand years.
"Lend a hand."
13

CHAPTER XI.
ALCOHOL

DESTROYS

THE WEALTH

OF THE WHOLE

PEOPLE.

Things Proved and Clear in Regard to the Effects of Alcohol — An Invoice of the Stock in Trade of an Industry of Destruction — The Claim
that Temperance Statistics are Inflated and Unreliable — The Demand
for a Commission of Inquiry — Col. Switzler's Work — The Liquor Production of the United States — A table Representing a Gigantic Business
Transaction — Remarkable Increase in the Use of Malt Liquors — Facts
Furnished by the Brewers' Association — Letter of Louis Schade. — Mr.
Zimmermanvs Figures — The 100,000 Annual Victims — The Figures for
1886 — The Cost of Drink per Family — The Annual Loss to the Nation
— ^Demands for a Commission of Inquiry.

T E have thus far confined our attention chiefly to the
investigation of the nature of alcohol and its effects
within the human system. It is clear from the light of experience, observation, science and history that alcohol is a
destructive poison to the healthy body ; that its supposed
benefit as a food is a fallacy ; that as a medicine its use is
seldom or never necessary, always attended with danger,
specially liable to abuse on the part both of the physician
and the patient, full of latent and fatal fascination to the
patient as yet uncursed by its love, and almost sure to revive
the tyranny of old appetite, which may have been by great
effort partially suppressed, but which can seldom, if ever,
be wholly eradicated ; that the food quality in the least noxious forms known, as in the fermented drinks, is so small
that its use as a nourishment elevates the practice of extracting sunbeams from cucumbers into a comparatively fruitful
industry, and gives dignity to the occupation of those who
sup on the east wind ; that in an economical view the millionaire would be ruined in the vain attempt to pay his board bill
if he were to live upon pabulum of this description, while
it would be a manifest impossibility for the physical machinery to manipulate the vast mass of liquid with its homoeopathic atoms of fodder, so that the digestive powers of the
giant could save the gnat from rapid starvation ; that there
194

STATISTICS

OF

DRINK.

195

is no form of horrid or fatal disease which does not find in
its use either its origin or aggravation ; that the intellect
disintegrates and perishes under its baleful influence ; that
it eats out the moral nature as with a tooth of a hot iron ;
converts its victim into a criminal or an imbecile ; and makes
death more welcome than life ; that it casts forth the drunkard
upon society, wrecked body and soul, damned beforehand,,
and already a naturalized citizen of the infernal world.
This we have seen to be the natural and almost unavoidable'
result of the habitual and prolonged use of alcohol by the individual human being. But it remains for us to ascertain, if
possible, and to sum up the vast account of crime and
misery — to take an invoice, as it were, of the stock in trade
of this great industry of destruction and despair.
This is no easy task ; to it have been given great volumes
written in blood, with pens of power on pages lighted with
unearthly fire. But there is a magnitude to the sul)ject which
the most vivid imagination cannot compass. The figures
are like those of astronomy, and their tremendous impre::-siveness cannot be increased by illustration. To one who comprehends at all the force of mathematical notation — of facts
in the form of figures — nothing can be so vivid and over\vh(^lming as the contemplation of a truthful and moderate statistical
statement of the extent of the traffic in alcoholic bevorasres, in
our country and in the Avorld.
It is to such a statement, with no more of explanation and
comparison than shall be necessaiy to assist the mind, in part,
to grasp the significance of calculations and tabulated matter,
that this chapter will be devoted. It has long been claimed
by those engaged in the liquor traffic and their advocates that
"temperance statistics" are inflated and unreliable. It is
true that the opponents of the traffic have never been al)le to
secure the services of their own government to assist in
obtaining the whole truth ; but this has been prevented by the
opposition of the traffic itself, which preferred to rest under
the weight of what Avas already proven, and asserted with
such proof that it was apparent to all that official investigation
would more than confirm its most astounding aggi'egates.
For six Congresses, twelve years in succession, have the
enemies of alcohol called upon the government for an impar-

196

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

tial Commission of Inquiry into this traffic. Six times has
the American Senate passed the bill, and so far the liquor lobby
has strangled the bill — that it might suppress the truth. That
truth is stranger and worse than the wildest fiction to be found
in the literature of the advocates of the Great Reform — and
they who oppose the investigation w^ell know it.
The Bureau of Statistics, under its very able chief, who
is a broad and liberal statesman, as Well as eminent
statistician, has given us the most recent and reliable of all
official data, ever collected in any country, of the extent
of the liquor trade. This invaluable service entitles Col.
Switzler to the everlasting gratitude of his countrymen living,
and of the generations to come. Henceforth we have a
minimum resting upon the solid basis of official mathematics.
Above and beyond rises the structure of probability and
of demonstration from other impregnable evidence — but
there is need of nothing more than these records to convince
every honest and unprejudiced mind that the traffic in
alcoholic beverages must 2:0.
The table on page 197 exhibits the amount of production of
fermented liquors and distilled "spirits in the United States,
together with the quantity of distilled spirits withdrawn for
consumption from bond, (where it is placed during the process of evaporation and until required for sale, so that tax
may not be exacted for more than is available for use) , from
1863 to 1886, inclusive. What gigantic business transactions
does this table represent ! What misery, crime and despair I
Better that the civil war had raged unchecked during the
whole period, if this terrible trade could have been destroyed
along with the institution which drenched this glorious Union
in fraternal blood.
The table on page 198 exhibits the annual consumption per
capita of population during the years 1840, 1850, 1860,
and from 1870 to 1886 inclusive. These per capita exhibits,
which, so common in tabulation, are perhaps the best to
convey an idea of the extent of the traffic as compared to the
whole population, but they also convey a false idea as to the
actual injury inflicted by it. The most of the burden of this
whole evil is in the first instance concentrated upon individual consumers, and their immediate dependents,
being

withdrawn

brandy

spirits

otherthan

CAPITA

fruit

Distilled

PER

« -* « •/: :; ji -J c; oc r- 3 -j< i-^ 5 jn 22 S tr ::t = 2; '7 i-; i^ 3

£ 9 g >*o ^ xo M
o-::'3

d of
distille
production

|2SSS3'-=St:gSS-3S£S§'g3'o'g^'S'iS

.3 >I^ o.a

S 3 r^ .tS "^ '* 3 .^ -^
mS

pi.ri
bransdy
ts.

I'roduc- Total

197

STATISTICS.

.3^3«50

it
fru

t rH X — i ^1 CO ^ 0 1^ 0 0 1^ ;o 0 0 0 »r> t^ C5 '•^ 0 1- 1^ t^ ^

S5

lion
of

• cp-ur-oirjo— '-or~-t--M— 1— ico'Tir- — — '"MX— <o

: 2 3 •§ S ^2 X 3 § ^.-S.?. ?1 2 S 1^=: 'X 'a §>%" ^^.

, CO -^ "^ — « vjc?o^c;l-3'^3I-'^1^^c;l^:co"c5
0 C-l ■ - X) » 0 '^ I-* fM CO C; ^1 C^ CO0.-.13
X s Ci-^ -rf^

; i-xoo

fl

o ~ - -5 O

_, 2 —

^ x-3 3.2

. 3?^ 5.

■*- p,° t. o " ;s.2-a

I

O

3 5 _ ? ? E'^-^S
c5 to pj cii-iS ^

r- 1- 01 o v^ q-. -r — ts 1;; oj 7? j? 0 oi 1 - 0 ;; 0 CO ^ yj

H

: ;3f 2§Si=gp?^
=■ r. - if

■a a

,
cologne

neuortral

fi4i 3 ><ji- --.s- a

: :§l'2iI^?j5S

-itd

.

to

"5

Pure,

.2

-«3.3W,il cT^
c "^ ^ o : y—'ii
Ji ."^
'3'^
C — i- o
^ -. «
£ P aC^t-3^§

spii

Tt^

• -incjcs — ci — op«n

c-"!; 3 -_2~^•■<

;^.'5i|S':oSS-27.
CD
'^ K o 3 j; oj '^
c; -, c — I. i. s - o

.a
E «.3~^.3

- r'-n

.cococoocji^cioa

:3>isfS55S.^"
Rum.

^

-■r

:j3

r.

-^xa

3: - 3"<;£ p O :; cj
.2

s.Ho^2

3.^«

« -- %- « O S :
: i»
u.3<«3ei-=~
•■ i~oic
oi 0^1 0 C5
t= r0 ri —r: 1Xa i~oi

2

<

;--—
lojci— ■ — — — —— ".
: o"o-^ori-"c"-"co

I .^ .— ' -^ ^H *-. '^cT'jC'^1
.COO-S.COOlCACOOl-}'
. (X 0 cooe-i^i^oco Vj

■S:§o5'co"g^5^-^
O— S J= O-S • ri '■'- 3
£ ji„ii != = !:• "-^ -a
^'^C^V.'S >1 O"""-! CO
=ip^
O ^ « g 3 - S

liquors.

Produc-

9'^

Bourbon
tion of fermented
wliisky.

I

") 322-^ 3 ai ,, 2-^3

^§xx2 5i|:J^f37gttg|-5:;2:j|£S32f;?H
-a
i5

t- 3 30

S

11 5

0

3

-§'?23^3=;§|

0(

0

c -

00 ex

X)a

c -00 03 i)cc5 ?
CO 00 0000000:

*^'*'-'ciCooaJ'-^a
.CiSj-ci-MOCi-d

198

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.
"^ C3 ?! C -i-S

-QO«<7<35r-i.^05a)CDO-*-^COOOt--*>-nn«OlM

2

so

2

S'^S

Sc2^-^off^OI— (iccoicot^t^ocot^oooDt^Gooo

CO
-< CO

<

f?;2
*i 'r:
w o
o,
o ■«!-"
2 ^
-^
^^ '3
f^ ""l
<X> "U

*OG0C-1OC51Ct^ai-HC00000»0:DC0t^00(M-<^CC

e ■,• o .

■i¥<0Ce0'-IOe-105C5i-HC5t-05lOO-*-*

5 3 -a

,-1

CO

2S-^of-^COr-Tc.
CO CO -* as 00 foco

5lO-HCO(
— x^

o3 M

c m >to-s a<<-<

yc3or3 t^COO'<* ■ ^ >0

^ S o =s 5j

to G O N

'"' ..a m » 2

-■ —

; <M i^ M 00 o

OOOOOOOOOCIOCOfMiriCiOOCO
) O C1<_
.
O CO
coco
CO—"
<M(HcococoC''3coeoc

O •"T'S

!h

o qj o s , ~

<;
-

TO = 3&S,^
-a oi^ a o g5

j? COlCOOC3Ti<t^OC5C
^-D --- Th ^O O cT^cI^'gO : '^t-^-^'id^'^O
r-H O ^Cl
w ^^
^H O^l 0» C-1 OO (M O^ CO CO CO CO ^ TT< o to to 1

■S

a> oti '-' d ">"*-•

.•55^OlOOC0t~-*OO03l0-*O>0rHlMa0r-l(M
2r~OOJiOG5COCOGOi-(e^L^iCT-MQDOOOCt~CO
?: CM CO t^ t^ C2 Ci to C? f— ' O CC^t-^tO (N to Ci O CS t^ -^
^00^^O(MOOr-i—
t
'^■^OC-l'-HOi'^r-OCiGOl'COGO^HCDCOOO^HtDC-l
r2 00 r^ O <?J O O' ^-^ !-<'fMCOC-IC-IOf—
'> r CO c-1 01 O r-^"rhX'-^OOOi—
■* -c r-^ O 00

tJ

CD !-^,

fl

-tf H 05

-5

tSCl^rt^S

•iS'-H:0^lCC002C^C^tOCO<>JCOOCI^Ht^G5^-CO^
o O CO to CD 00 OD t-- r^CO O <o"crio"o C-icTt-^O i-H t-^
^^ CO »C CO IT' ^H C-l :D lO Oi CO O CD CC ^1 r-H^CO-^O rH )CO
C5^

o
H

on

5

1— (

w

on
rn

;?;

r-l
W-i:

'^

?'^

I s.;!r^ '^ O 3

o~

>-

COG^r-^iCTOT
::ocot-^ari7i
t^
c t- CI :o
O0'<*iy3o:ot^c t^c-i^^t^ooto
oi CO :d :»
GO C^ CO CO rH
c'T'Cto'ooo
^(^^<—
i(?^(Miyi(MC^(MC
»C lO O -^ iT-l
Ol CO 00 -^ '"
f^

M

(^
w "^

<

h-l

<i
u
|yi

n
w

-O lO -H O r-H
i:r>iO-HOr-HCOC5COf—
'COCOCOtN^-OOSO
'
CO'MC
CO -*
ti:^_ iO
C2 tr:
(>"i Ic
:• ^ ''^
> CiH^COt-GOO
O C5 Oi C3 O --^Cri

O

^ 'd^"'— I'O Oi'o GO CO -^-rh CO c
CO o
- CM OT O lO CO ^ >C »C »0 CO ■i61<»ooi^d5o5o5oi05CDco<riotd^'^
^O: 00 CO

^^

1— ICO-^OCOOC-I^Ot

iU
p

p4

O

<D[ij - 3 m a)

£ao3.S«§

■ It ?? ^ ^ ?5•t-^cj^cocn
Ir !Q ?5 r:* oiqc
'i5 ^ ^ '^ (■*>—
'^ '^(lOOlCOClO
^ '^
^CO-^Or-HXlCOCOO^OCOCSOOi—

Iz;
1-1

d
awni

o o o

rcOODoTt^

•"^cO'-,Go— 'Oo:iocooao^ic:-^r-^cot-i— iiM'Tj^
^OOl'iCCDCDGOCOCSlOCTJ'-i'^t'-OiCOt-OOGOairH
-^ 00"^1D t-;_i:0_(M rMO iQ 00 T-H C:^'^* COOOiCD IQOCO

i::^^^

<1

<U

•SS X O S CS OJ

s-<d^ ooo ■■ " COO_ C5CO_ 5 cCO. o cT o"r-I"^(rf
.
o irTo

Oj

H

• g ^."^

i^

a:>coQOcot--H::ci—
IC
H^C200CD^O
iOC-I^CO
OOO-^OCCMCOOi—
lOOtr-iOOiOOl
*'ioco CO c6"^
.
. . ^lO O^^i— < <^ T-' ^ tr- rj;)

"S CD S^ S+3
O o.^
S. S ^ gn

p

'■jS '■jS <:£

CO t^t

■]

O

.g^

■th" :c ^ CO t^' CO a?" ic CO :o
r CO CO tr^GTos
1 -rj* CO «r: i-H .— ix)tc
I
;o:oc-i"^co«rti-Hi—
i0C0(MO'*-^«'OO-;i<
00 T-H tr^ ©■! OT 00 (a O O t-^
CO t-^ CO CO C-r ''i^ cT 00 H^ o
o CO
:ooac:'
■^3rcocTcoco
c^
c^ c-1
(M t-^
CM
(Mcooc:.co:ooac:'GiOOi—
('*^^CJ**ooo;'^
COCOCO'^^'^iOiCiOtO^
■I :lc CO
1 t--co
I^OiClr^O
Oit— '#:iCCOCOCO'—
OCiO>-t
iC C^ CO -T to Ol
<oo^o OI^ ICOOCO-^CO'^^O^C^CO^
CO
-^ CO'^^O?

cJ S o 3

H

00 C^r-J^lO «3 O O C^

cot^^iC'^ciooc:
00 c: r^ Xi c^ t^ CO o w. —
oocjioo<:oo?cocoo<N

• O CO O) t-- CO

W K"

o

0^-*^0^00

■ ^ t^ CO o —

K

H

^ I— I (M ^ O 0^C2^^O

<1

CO

C

O

o cs 3 S " a

ft
o
p

H

to

^

1o;

C;CD
COCDC^iOC-ICOTt^OlOOfSlCOr^i^JOiOiOC^OCO
^ o CO
oo o or<rJ"t-^o o CO o r--"co cd'i^co c-rco O i-h"
• o CO Oi^co o -^o lo r-^"^ OS c; 01 »c co o -^ i—* co oi
A CO i-^oroT-rjTco'yr'Ti^'co ci" c^'-^-'^cc oco ot5'^oo?
'S-<i4ioooi'cr'COio::otooif:tr:;»r:cDt^>^t^ooi::^t^

<<

w'^'-J S=w

4J'5
O 3 „,'^ S
o3..cg-SS

m

t^
O
O
H
Ph
1^

!25
O
O

o

<^5

!l5
3
p

o ^ S <^ ^
fi< (^TjO :0 r-^--^C:^"ci^r-^rH rH ^r4"rH r-H F-Tr^'rHr^rH
• O CO CO -Xl t— O '^ iC O -T) GO CO t—

.^ O Xi lO lO O ^'

M
W
fU

^oscoiocD— tcoior--oi-"*co:ocoo-*x-^ioy5
'^ O O C^^ CO O 00 -H CO Ir^ '^^ f>l^ CO -riH^ to o to t-^ -^

;?;

' CO I^^O^Ol CO ^Ci^cq to CO O :0 O i-^'^t-'^tO '^O (?^
:' o :oc<rr--^criio '^^-^'^f r-^i-^cTof f-- t~-^o ic CO t^oa
'^■rti-rt(Qoi— io:ocoo':oiOio-Tt<io<:ocDtr-t-i>-cDCD

hH

H
«Ph1

^g!l"|s^

S CO CO'0:r>'::t<'^-^^HO^--00(M'M>COl-^C003
CO -^^ CO 01 ir:r irf 'Ji^ CO cT o" o o?' o o cf CO gT of trT
C>.i--.

n

'A

a;
P

fM

"A

fi H

a
(/)P

"^ao
^r

Of—
(GOh-lr-C^l.-^rM-^OO^-^COO
CO"'coTo
^"^
CO— 'CiGOGOO.O-1-rlOOOOOiCr—
iCt^CS

-C> -C- CO t—COOtOOT—
C-T Oi'trf :o t-^Olt^CO
--H to i-H ,Cd"cO t~^CO lO
.^jO
• ^-^^-"•^(M
'MOClOOrHiOCOCDtO

C^ -2 05 05 to'-^ "U

O

Ph3 O

m 3
OOOOr-irMCO-#lO-r3r--GOC50^C^CO'^tOCD
^»ocot--ir^t^c^r-i--l:^t-t-.t--ooooooQOQOcoco
COCOCOGOGOOOOOOOGOCOOOOOXJOOOOQOOOCOOOOO

Sis 2 go

y4. AL Powell,
Editor of '' The Temperance Advocate"

INCREASE

OF

MALT

LIQUORS.

199

not more than perhaps one fourth of the entire people, who
thus become as it were a pestilential citizenship within the
body politic, operating upon the whole nation and world
as the poison itself does upon the natural body of the individual.
The most striking fact revealed by the table is the decrease
in the percentage of per capita consumption of distilled
spirits during the last half-century on the one hand and
the increase of the percentage of consumption of wines and
liquors not distilled on the other. It must l)e remembered
that this is not a decrease of the amount actually consumed by
the people. On the contrary, the first table shows that the
amount of distilled liquors produced increased from 16,000,000
gallons in 1863 to 81,000,000 in 1886, and the amount
actually withdrawn for consumption from 16,000,000 to
69,000,000 gallons, although during that period population has only doubled. During the half-century the increase of per capita consumption of malt lujuors has been
more than eightfold, while population itself has increased less
than fourfold, or from 17,000,000 to 60,000,000.
The following history in figures of the malt liquor traffic
in the United States and in each state and territory during the
last thirteen years, and of its development during the last
twelve years, is very perfect and equally astounding. It
is duly authenticated by Hon. Louis Schade, the attorney for
many years of the liquor traffic at Washington and editor of
the Sentinel, published in that city, which is the organ of the
interest he represents. Having first called upon him in his
absence and then written to him for information touching the
traffic, I have to thank Mr. Schade for this and other courtesies,
but for which this book might have contained fewer facts
and therefore have been less damaging to his clients. Mr.
Schade did me the honor to publish my letter to him in the
Sentinel, and I therefore reciprocate the courtesy so far as I
am able, by giving his letter such currency as may be, in
this book. It shows how an able and honest gentleman may
be conscientiously engaged in a business which ruins his fellowmen. One thing is certain, the great interest he represents
could not employ one whose personal character is better calculated to confer respectability upon a business sadly in need
of that service.

200

THE

TEMPERANCE

If there were not so many

MOVEMENT.

respectable and able men

eno'aged in it, and if society itself in its ignorance and appetite
were not even now so oblivious of the extent of the evil which
like an inherited disease interpenetrates the body politic, the
task of its removal would be less difficult. I pity them, but I
never denounce the men who are engaged in the liquor traffic
and those who aid and abet them as worse than the community
which tolerates their business. But as a member of society,
with no pecuniary interest involved, and in no way dependent upon its prosecution for the necessaries of life, and having no unsought entanglements with the trade, if I fail to
denounce the miserable and infernal business and to devote
my last dollar of money and moment of time, and if need be
drop of blood, to its annihilation from the face of the whole
earth, then / deserve the pity of no one and the everlasting
execration, not of man alone, but of God. A.nd I shall have
my reward.
That is the way I feel about liquor dealers, the liquor trade
and those of us who are in favor of the liquor business without an excuse. The strength of the liquor trade is in the
countenance it receives from those who want to share in the
liquor money and the liquor vote. How unconscious is Mr.
Schade of the real effect of business in which he is engaged !
He even thinks that the increase of the malt trade is in the
interests of "true temperance." He seems to think that we
must be boozy upon beer or delirious on whisky. The alternative of total abstinence and legal prohibition does not daAvn
upon his mind.
Both Mr. Schade and his table are worthy of
profound study.
Washington, D. C, July 22, 1887.
Dear Sir :— Your desire to be furnished by me with reliable
statistics in regard to the production of fermented and distilled
liquors I shall try to fulfill to the best of my abilities.
To-day I send you a table giving you the production of fermented
liquors in this country since 1875. The figures are compiled from
the Internal Revenue Reports and reliable. The same Internal
Revenue Reports will give you also the production of alcoholic
spirits. But whilst you can safely assume that all the fermented
liquors are consumed as beverages, that assumption is not safe in
regard to alcoholic liquors manufactured, and hence all such
statistics are mere guess-work, as a great deal of alcohol is being

MR. schade's letter.

201

used for mechanical purposes. Possibly the Revenue Department
might give you a table showing the amount of spirits turned into
whisky and other liquors used as a beverage, or exported.
That fermented liquor table whicli I inclose* will show you how
Maine and Vermont have gone back since 1875 on true temperance, by stopping the brewing business and forcing their people
to the whisky bottle. Surely that cannot be the aim of a true
temperance man.
I regret that you called at my office in my absence, as I would
have been glad to meet you. I thank you also for the friendly
sentiments you are kind enough to express in 3'our letter in regard
to me.
I have written to the U. S. Brewers' Association and they will
forward to j'ou a number of documents. You will also observe
that, tliough an old Democrat, I do not excuse the prohibition proclivities inmy party, on the contrary censure them more severely
than I have done heretofore in regard to those I have met with in
the Republican party. At any rate I shall always act honestly in
this important issue. I remain, sir, most respectfully, your obedient
servant,
Louis Schade.
Hon. IIexry W. Blair,
U. S. Senate, Washington, D. C.
If we should assume that the averaire percentage of alcohol
in ale, beer, wine, cider and all fermented li(|U()rs consumed
is 10 per cent., which, considering the processes of fortification carrying some of them as high as 25 per cent, even, is, I
think, none too high an estimate, and the average of distilled
spirits as containing 50 per cent, of alcohol, then five gallona
of the former would be the equivalent of one gallon of spirits.
The total consumption of wines and liquors (fermented) for
1886 was 737,296,554 gallons or 145,459,311 gallons of distilled spirits. It has already been shown that the alcohol
performs its work with the same efficiency according to its
actual quantity, whether mixed with much or little water.
Thus we have as the consumption of alcohol reduced to the
form of distilled spirits in the United States, during the year
1886, 217,720,925 gallons or an average per capita consumption of the people of the United States in 1886 of 3.63 gallons.
If now we reduce the quantity of wines and fermented drinks
consumed in 1840 to distilled liquor, as we have done above
for the consumption of 1886, and divide the total by the popu* See p. 202 for table here referred to.

202

THE

; : :^ : : r :
V a;

.

TEMPERANCE

•o ■

:g : :
:

-."^ : :

:S : :

:8 : : : iS ; ; : : : ; : :2 : ; : :

: : : :^ : : : :

■^ : :

;t^ ;

r :

MOVEMENT.

t^ irs CO t-H — . o:>

■Ks Si
H O '£rjOt

CiDCOO

;

'00 -^

....(;.;,■

Th CO ITS O

•

;t^

C-I

ocTcD (>i ^co ai 'T o

«*3 : : : ! ■ *. '. *. : :£^

: : : :^ :

,_i

•»•

.■y?
COCO!??C71

C^ CO O 55 '7^ C-t
r-^co_c^Tr CM tr-

COi-iO

coo'co"^

ie odes' -(jTo o'

0-*

;CO
5^^^'Q^COC'?^^

00 t- CM CO
O^CM-rP_
CO Ci CO CM

t-i

o ■

ccc

05 (

OOCOt^CD

CM-T^tiCOC
CM iTf l.-^ C - ,

ai_cc(ro
-^ CO t-^io'^
QOCMO'

»O;-^C0iOC4
c

or-

•-co .0(

^

CM
g; CD i-i CC CO C"!

t^c^oo
cocoO
co'i-HTh
t^CM-^'^co
>—
I
CO

r—COCii-HC
r-i
CMi-1

^
r-^
CO

OrHCMCOCM
CM .-H Ci r-^
Tj^' O .-J CM

i;

CO^-COCOi— 'CT10»C'CMC3"^COC:i'— I
COiOCMCO'-'aii— iC0 3SCMCMCM-^CD
1— tCMCMG:ic:ic:):or- o^o lO qo^co^':o_

i•

:>iO
o w>
CO CM
ocoasc^cocra
CO
o CM
cd"t>>'
o CO
tO 1—1
o"co"-^'=^
c^Io co'o'
O r-< I— t
C-J CO r-t
CS

■5CMO— >0-:

COt-*(OCO
C^rHC^Tr_^

r-coGO-H

OCOCOOi— "CMCOOOCM
i-iCOCMCOCOOC-iO

C':i_ c-i^ CM "■^'go'cm'^i:
■^ o^ Ci^ c
.
DCOl—
tCC"-"
i*

^aiCOl>;.G^lC
jiicocM
--rcD"cOCOC
-^OOCMCOCl
I—
<rj
r-.CO t^CSO

o :o^-*_^oc^

30

CO'-iCOO
COf-CO

1 ^

O

oT

lo'oi"--rT-^.od CO r-TcM

CO »C' O

ir- .i

HCMCMCOCOCOCTiClOS
DiiOCOTt^f— <t-ococo

CMCO

CO

rH

CC-^CDCCC^ICOOt-OS-^i—ICOt^C^
cocot— -^coc^t--^coo«riCOCMcn>
Tj^_-^^cooocM-^ooi--r--__ccco^^i-i_^

r-ooO'5t^
OCOTt^O

TH''Ttr^'*''^'cri<NC^''*''0"CM'"TO
lOt-^
PI 00 oi I— 1 1— I CO
c-coascMff^o

-HCD cTi-T
0--HCO-H

OCOCM

CM

Q0C?4CM

'<
I"

CiOrHCOvO

I

C^C>l,«OCM

1

lO

COG:)COOOrH|>.rt"Cr'r-iCO-^OTf^r-iO
rti-^0:)C0CCC0OaiCMi.-T>C0i— lOiiO'+i— 1-^

T^'^a^cOf-H_cs_co o^

Tf^_CM_i>-^cD.-*^c:^^o

oTof'-^rHCDCOrHuo"
.— 'i-HiOi— <-»^CO
eo

COI) T*^Oi
O^r-TcO
CM OO 00
CO
corsjry^
— r-ii-l
-

O
-t^O'iftCOCOC^MtO'+icOCOi.lC^l
-— .COuOCOiQCMC-t-i£t.ODCM-rt*CO
o-— <c
l>^TtH_t^C^OD 0q_a5_rH 00 OS o^ t-^co
b- b- TlH CM 00 iO
r-lCO
r-iiCOtof oTtCi-H
tH oTi-i^O CO I-^CO — H^^

b-CMCDi—
too
■^^CO
00 t'-CM
^CD
t^ t—CC

'»-0 CO'CO of jO iO CS i-J"

1 CO CMOO
DOr-tC^r-t
GO lO CO t— i CO OCOCM
-H rf t-*"!:

■^

CO'Ooi

ggOCOTpt-t

i-HC

iCO'^'C^lTfCOCOOOTf

CO c
CO t

iO 1— 00

Ocooiooco
oocnooco

-lOCOCMCit^COC

r- o t^ t- o
t^ t^ -Th r^ o

OCM

CMiOOOOO^CO-H
COClCOCMCOCDOJt-OO
l-^ 00 O C^ Ol _ C^

CiQO'M-fOlr-C^'— "COI^CMCM— CD
^ r:i i-O cs C5 — ' -* -^ ^Q CO r- CO CM «— I
OS uO CO CO C^l t-^ :0 I— ' CM O CO "<f co_co_
P Ci CM Tt* CM iO r1

.—I CS O

00
i-H

Tj^^COC^C^ii^^
O O CO t^ (^
(Mrl^OO

(Mt^

OlC7=l>.COCt>CO00CMr
rj^_0 CM TlH^-^__.(0 CO "^
O
lOcO
CO
03 -^i—
wo"co~<:o"ira"
CO
CMCO

1-t

:??S

»rs
m
CO

-rhizDasco
I-H r--^ cooaco c 300COOOC
COCOt^-+'t~-'-<C*JCr:3T^»CMC
Tf
CO o lO o CO o t-^C3_r
t-H

CO O

-COC^-^l-^
>"
CMcOtr^ O
^lr^"*»OCO
Tt^'cD oT CM r-I" i-i"c_
t^CMGM
ri

■J i^ r^ o CO CO CM CO
D CD CO CD irii O .— I CM
DcococacMO^co— «

■<ircrrc4"cM
Th_o=oco

■^i— (I— I— I
-OiOKOC^
r-iCO

CM CO CM I-H
'.O CO ^=> l>. o

D CO 00 CO CO CM .-

OCOCJ.'O^

lO'i-HCMCO"
05C0'-tr-l
COC^iCOOODCO'— (CDOCDOJCOCDiOCOC^
rHt— ICD-OCM.— tTt^OCOCOO'iOl—
Cr3.-HU0

t^ (— It-^OlnO
coco
iQCO_a5COCO^CMa^"^^CO.
"co -d^
t-^tf
i>r
t- CO CO CM CM CO
-CMO
C^

CMOCOOS^

Tt*
to
-^

Cr.
CMCOUO
I— i,r-«
Tf^'oTh^Or-I't-^UOCO
*. t^cd cocn
I-H --J iO
I-.
CM
.
!>-

c:^ .— II— CO CO CD r-<o:i'^'rt-ai'n'— tCMt'-cocoiO'*'— tcoco"
OCDOCTiCOr^
-4i uo 00 CO t— o 1— 1 1-- o ci CO uo r- c
•rh« lO C-I^C^CM CO ODCO
CM"iccicococrr
If^ ^'-i,'^COC0i-^l>;-^CDCDC^i-HCD U
CD
in coo I-^ tCt^r-T 00 UO t^"^"^•rji
lOrHcoC^
r-l
r-i
C*l CO
OO

CMr-lO'-H

coi>-e>cocO'<^c::co

0 00 Tt' ift c^ •* o

CO t-- O r-t rH t- --• t>
CD CO i-i_r-J_CM u5 r-« l>^

01 -.C C5 CD CM -rf CD
COricOCM

OOCDO
COCMOf-T
CM^C<r-(

Dcor-i— loco^
5 -^ GO — ffii CO C

t^O^O
CO O
xo'o'iOCMi-T

3-HCOOiOt— ■^C0C0-t<CMCMC3r~-Cl-^t.!0
MCDr-COCDCDiQCO'—0-*t-OCO'^CS<30
■J t-^CO iCCOCiCrj^uOCMCDCD^CO^COai^COCOCM

OC71_CO-*^
cocrico— ^

■h"c^co
3

odco»o >o h-Tcor-TTj^"

CO
Ut) -^"tH
CO CO co'':D"cD'f-H
CM O ?3 r-l co"cf
Ci CO —
C5 T-H
en
lOr-if-1
r-t
i-irfCM

rH

-^^^aDcomr-Hioo

oa;r—
iocot-cD'^"^cor--iC)cri-^
'-t^'^JC^-OCOOO^lOOr-tTt^
i^oOOS

O CM
00
(— I -f
CM -f
t- C--1
i-O

co"iiO~
CM

i>• OD
• -^

^^rH lO
l-HlTD
CO

^

CO
CD C*t
rH CO !>;
I-H
i-H
cocoW Xi O
l^t^iOCMTh

M^COCOCOCOJS
— <ot— ciocncoiOcriCMOoo
— COOiCDCMCDt^"
"
" ^^r^l--^iC CNQOQO^diCDCMCD^
co'aa"co'i:Hr-f
tot^
t^cojfsoco
t-;r
CMC^
i-i
r-l
e<

t— lOt'^'^^'^'^ouoascococMOoi^coi—

cot— t--ocMOOt^^-*t^'3;oi2-Ht^oiic
CMOSCOi— "OC'I-*il— CO'-^'— <i(OiraOit~-'— ifMTHajh-CO-rt-i— rocOCDC7lOOC3C2t—
CCi— iiftiCOt— CO'^viOCMCSt— lOCM^-Oi
o
c^ xo^i^__QO S_o^o.cK> co^o =o.o^o^cn. 5:\o ^ cm lo_
o ^^o|.^^cd ^, ^.
'"ic^,'^,'^, "^^ '^^ ^,^.'-:.^. ^^^ '^,^,»^,
CM^Co'cM't-Tio"'— I'lrs"
ZC~^cScO-rpC^rS~Sc^^iy5'
h-TcO C^CM"af lO r-i cf
C^t^TtTco rH I— ( TtiC0r-«Tf5u:5^O(N
i-l-^
00
TJ<

^S2

i^ I i =i2 3 °.S
S-^

S t"^3

o " a^'" oils

'3 =l€lit'Sa-i:^|Siii2<^
s 5 K o e ^ ^ ^-"S25::3

° o oj o) a o a) c^

t, a J o « a-i; ^'•'"'i^tj-S*-

HISTORY

IN

FIGURES.

203

iation of 1840, we have the following result: 71,244,817
divided by 5, equals 14,248,963 gallons, which added to
43,060,884 gallons of distilled spirits as shown by the table
gives a total of 57,309,804 gallons as the total consumption of alcohol reduced to the form of distilled spirits
in the year 1840, or 3.20 gallons per capita, an increase
since 1840 of per capita intemperance as shown by the
actual consumption of alcohol of forty-three hundreths, or
or nearly one half gallon for each man, woman and child in
the country. This increase is more than 10 per cent, of
alcohol actually consumed by each person since 1840. Of all
these totals, as shown in note to the table, 90 per cent, is consumed in the form of beverages ; all that used in medicine,
in the arts and scientific processes, etc., is included in the
other tenth. I do not think these calculations can be successfully assailed by those who claim that the increase in the consumption offermented beverages has lessened that of alcohol,
however it may have changed the classification of drinks
consumed, from one column to another. It is the same old
devil in another uniforni, or, to change the image, the same
old poison sugar-coated, that it may sell the better, and so the
more surely in the end kill the unwary.
The table on the following page shows the kinds of distilled
and malt liquors and wines consumed (not the amount produced) in the United States during the year, ending June
30th, 1886.
Here we have the various arms of the same service. I
have endeavored above to indicate their aggregate deadliness
by reducing them all to the same unit of action, which is the
alcoholic power contained by each.
Nine tenths of this amount was consumed in the form of
drinks last year, that is 663,566,889 gallons, which is eleven
gallons apiece ; or, if the drinking population be one fifth of
the whole, as many estimate, it is fifty-five gallons to each.
But efforts to give to each his aliquot part of the evil is like
an attempt to equalize the pestilence, the ravages of the
cyclone or of the Chatsworth railroad disaster.
Only those who can reckon the calamity of a destroyed
body and a lost soul, and apportion it to the whole community can make a satisfactory general average of the evils

204

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

of last year's consumption of intoxicating drinks in this
country. They tell us that 100,000 human beings — our own
countrymen — were destroyed by the direct and indirect action
of alcohol, used as a beverage, in the year of our Lord and
Saviour, Jesus Christ, 1886. Suppose there was one, what is
the damage ? Was it infinite ? Was there any need of it ?
Who is responsible ? What is the extent of that responsibility ? Am I my brother's keeper ? We are consuming still
more in 1887.
My countrymen, think of these things.
KIND

OP

LIQUORS.

DISTILLED

SPIRITS.

Domestic :
From fruit
Other :
Bourbon whisky..
Rye whisky
Gin
High wines
Pure, neutral, etc. .
Miscellaneous

Quantity.

Import
value.

Other ;
From grain
From other material.
Total imported
Total spirits

Proof galls. Dollars.
1,555,994
14,080,623
5.132.634
8,861,247
922,695
675,653
2,400,886
26,434,289
10,787,334

LIQUORS.

1,410,258 1,816,580
72,261,614

Quantity.

Import
value.

LIQUORS.
Gallons.
640,740,288 Dollars..

Imported :
Not in bottles

939,573

794,225
412,032

1,281,8.59

Total imported

2,221 ,432 1,206,257
Total malt Uquors.. 642,967,720
WINES.
Domestic

:
667 Imported
Champagne, etc
832
still wines :
455,2.31 1,106,8.52
265,486
109,522
Vermuth :
326,508
651,984
117,067
192,689

The grand total of all is —
Distilled spirits
Malt liquors
Wines
Gallons

OF

MALT

70,851,355
Imported :

KIND

Total imported...
Total wines

17,366,393
547,678

3,002,400
560,933 1,280,722
3,535,157 2,396,539
171
260
67,640
56,799
4,700,827 6,753,472
22,067,220

72,261,614
642,967,720
22,067,220
737,296,554

But, see! here is our reward. Look into the columns of
the next table (p. 205).
There it is — " Total internal and customs revenue !" What
a mass of money — and of misery !
Ninety-six millions last year !— one dollar and sixty cents
apiece — while on the other hand the people for this paid
fifteen dollars in cash, every one of them, if you divide it
equally. On this transaction each one of us receives $1 . 60 and
pays out $15.00 — losing $13.38, or eight times as much as

205
PAETNEESHIP

WITH

GIANT

DESPAIR.

we get — besides all the rest for which see the records of crime,
wretchedness and shame in full. As a fact, everybody sufiered
greatly, and twelve millions of us were chained by it in a land
of darkness, — the valley of the shadow of death, where no
Redeemer is, with staff and rod to comfort. There is no
rescue in that valley, for it is one vast infernal region, where
nothing lives save that which imparts death with bludgeon,
bite or noxious exhalation. Absolutely this is all : one
dollar and sixty cents apiece, our annual dividend in this
partnership with Giant Despair. I might leave the statement
here, so far as our own country is concerned. These tables
are the key of infinite investigation, argument and thought.
AMOUNT.S OF INTERNAL AND CU.STOMS REVENUE RECEIPT-S OF THE UNITED
STATES FROM MALT LIQUORS, DISTILLED SPIRITS AND AVINES FROM
1866 TO 1886, INCLUSIVE.
Iiilemal revenue.
endiiifj
June 30—

1866
1867
18(>8
1809
1870
1871
1872
1873
1874
1875
1870
1877
1878
1879
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885
1886

Spirits.

Dollars.
:5:5,20S,172
33,,542,1),>2
18,0.55,031
45,071 ,231
55,(50(5 ,094
40,281,8-18
49,475,510
.52,099,372
4!),444,090
52.081 ,991
.5(5,42.5 ,;J05
57,40!) ,4:50
50,420,810
.52, .570 ,285
(11, 1*5 ,.509
07,1.53,975
09,^73 ,408
7l,:j'JS,775
70,905 ,:585
07,.51 1,209
09,092,296

Customs

Fermented

Malt

liquors.

liquors.

Dollars.

Dollars.

5,220 ,.5.V5
0,0.57 ,.501
5,955 ,S09
0,09!) ,879
6,319,127
7,389 ,.502
8,2.58 ,488
9,:524,938
9,;J04 ,080
9,144,904
9,571 ,281
9,480,789
9,937 ,052
10,729 ,;i20
12,829
,,>^03
13,700,241
10,1.53 ,!)20
1(5,900,(510
18,084,954
18,2:50,782
19,676,731

194,233
205,202
235,930
270,083
315,915
433,058
584,409
6(52,952
580,988
577,499
425,318
317,769
240.292
2,54,099
28:5.296
321,048
417,202
511,383
53;},241
510,999
585,102

Distilled

revenue.

Winos.

and customs
revenue.

rhtllars.

Dollars.

spirits.

Dollars.

l,9i»3,8S3
3,.542,.5S2
3,317,071
3,(5;53.141
3,911,107
3,951, .500
4,373,410
4,250,.52l
3,917,010
3,:J91,4'J6
2,947,(594
2,701,999
2,4.59,410
2,511,130
2,788,531
2,905,708
3,101,522
3,374,507
3,141,:W1
2,94-5,9.02
2,834,096

3,044,399
3,421,295
2,981,70:5
3,524,005
4,110,!;45
4,478,974
4,205,826
4,280,014
3,912,872
3,:593,203
2,980,185
2,7.52,901
2,400,520
2,.595,241
3,089,445
3,370,901
3,604,929
5,:5(57,4.51
3,.589,25;5
3,06.5,792
3,774,349

44,231,240
46.709.532
31,11G,8(»

58,(524 ,:539
70,202,918
62,535,542
00,9.57,719
70,017,800
07,l(5,5,(>40
68,r)8L-,l(S3
72,350,703
72,782,948
65,,524,176
08,0.50,081
80,170,584
87,517,873
93,210,981
100„522,732
101,254,226
92,898,554
95,963,144

Colonel Switzler has published, in connection with his tabulated and other matter, an "estimate of the co.st of alcoholic
beverages to the consumer, prepared at his request by Mr.
N. F. Barrett, the able editor of the JVeiv Yorh Grocer." This
estimate is not subject to the critcism that it is exaggerated.
On the contrary, as we may hereafter see, it is at the lowest
minimun of probability, and therefore particularly valuable.
It is made purely from the economic stand-point, and is here

206

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

introduced that it may be found in connection with the other
important matter contained in Colonel Switzler's reportTo begin with, both Mr. Barrett and Mr. Edward Atkinson
agree that the total cost of intoxicating liquors in this country
for the year 1886, after deducting ten per cent, for various
forms of useful comsumption, was $700,000,000. Of course
that sum is wholly beyond comprehension, and its increase
or diminution becomes important only in comparison with,
other vast amounts which make up the schedule of our
national affairs. Mr. Barrett believes that whatever amount
of the entire mass of liquors manufactured is consumed,
otherwise than as a beverage, is made good by the various
forms of adulteration and of dilution by water, for which the
consumer pays as for the liquor itself. He thinks fifteen per
cent, covers all forms of adulteration or reduction by the use
of any other agent. Mr. Barrett presents the following table
or estimate of the "cost of alcoholic beverages to consumers
in the United States."
DISTILLED

SPIRITS.

The annual consumption of domestic and imported distilled
spirits as reported by the United States Bureau of Statistics
for the five years ending June 30, 1886, was as follows ;
Gallons.
1886
72,261,614
1885
1884

■
............

Total for three years
Average per year
1883
1882

70,600,092
81,128,581
223,990,287
74,663,429
78,452,687
73,556,976

375,999,950
Total for five years
75,199,990
Average per year
He adopts 75,000,000 gallons as representing the quantity
of distilled spirits (including alcohol) annually consumed in
the United States, and after deducting for various causes, and
increasing for other reasons, that finally the consumer drinks
and pays for that amount.

CONSU3IPTION

OF

207

BEEE.

The retailer gives $2.25 per gallon for liquors and $1.15
to $1.25 for high Avines, and the drinker pays 7^ cents per
glass. The retailer gets 60 glasses from a gallon, making
the total cost of '^whiskies" $337,500,000.
He giv^es us the following table as to beer ; the annual
consumption of which for five years has been as follows :
Gallons.

1886
1885
1884

642,967,720
598,131,866
590,016,517

Total for three years
Average yearly

....

1883
1882

1,829,116,103
609,705,367
551,497,340
526,379,980

Total for five years
2,906,993,423
Average per annum
581,398,685
Adopting the average annual consumption for three years
as a l)asis, we have 609,705,367 gallons as representing the
quantity drunk, of which 2,100,370 gallons were imported.
He concludes, after careful calculation, that fifty cents per
gallon fully represents the cost to the consumers, and finds
the cost of beer to be $304,852,683.
WINES.

Four million one hundred thousand six hundred and sixtyfour gallons of imported Avines at $4.00 per gallon cost the
consumer $16,402,656 ; 17,391,343 gallons of domestic wines
at $2.00 per gallon cost $34,782,686.
His summary is in the following table :
Kinds of Liquors.

Quantity,

Estimated cost.
Per gaUon.

Spirits
Beer
Impoi-ted wines.
Domestic "sviues.
Totnl iinnnal cost to consutners of alcolinlic beverages in the United
States
for three years, enclino: .Tune;;o, ISSfi —
Add for illicit whiisky and home-made wines

7'),ono.noo
gallons'.
C0;i,70.>..367

4,100.064
17,391,343

50
$424 00
50
00

Total.
$337,510,000

304,&y2,G83
J0,'<02,GJ6
34.7fci2,6S6

003,-538,025
0,401,975
700,000,000

208

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Mr. Barrett corroborates his general accuracy by the following appeal to " the last yearly statement of the Bureau in
detail."

BUREAU

STATEMENT.

Domestic sphits consumed

Gallons.
70,851,355

Gallons.

Less alcohol used in arts
Less spirits used to adulterate
brandy

8,861,247
imported
455,231

Used as a beverage
Water added estimated at 15 per cent
Imported spirits (less brandy and alcohol)

61,534,877
9,298,515
954,195

Total spirits consumed
ESTIMATED

9,316,478

71,787,587
COST.

Domestic distilled spirits, 71,787,587 gallons, 60
drinks per gallon, at 7^ cents per drink, or $4.50
per gallon
.' gallons, at 50 cents
$323,044,141
Domestic
beer, 640,746,288
320,373,144
Imported beer, 2,221,432 gallons, at $1
2,221,432
Domestic wines, 17,366,393 gallons, at $2
34,732,786
Imported champagne, 547,678 gallons or 2,738,390
.
quart bottles, at $2.50
6,845,975
Imported still wines, 4,096,090 gallons, at $4
16,384,360
Imported vermuth, 57,059 gallons, at $6
342,354
Imported brandy, 455,231 gallons; domestic spirits^
used in adulteration, 455,231 gallons ; total, 910,462
gallons, at $8
7,283,696
Total

$711,227,888

So this is the result of a determined effort of the able editor
of the A.nierican Grocer, — I quote his language — " to present
such a statement as would command the indorsement of such
high authorities as yourself (Col. Switzler) and Mr. Edward
Atkinson, and in order that it may be used to put a stop to
the wild stories constantly circulated regarding the enormous
sum

annually spent in the United States for alcoholic bev-

erages."
I confess that for one I do not see much

cause for con-

gratulation over the result. Few of the most fanatical of
temperance statisticians do worse for the liquor traffic than

MR.

ZIMIMERMAN'S

FIGURES.

209

Mr. Barrett and Mr. Atkinson, so far as the direct cost is
concerned. Nine hundred million is the estimate of some, but
usually the direct losses are considered about $750,000,000 ;
and indirect, for which Mr. Barrett provides no place, at as
much more. I will, however, for the sake of showing that
there is some method in the madness of these "fanatics," give
a condensed statement of the estimate of Rev. Chas. H. Zimmerman, as published in the Union Signal of June 16, 1887.
He says that the drink traffic is a legalized wholesale robber.
It robs the people of this country of $4,000,000,000— four
billions — annually. Yet he estimates for the direct cost — (the
same for which Mr. Barrett and Mr. Atkinson fix upon
$700,000,000 — for the purpose of silencing the prevalent nonsense of temperance ftmatics) only $900,000,000. As to this
item we see later on Avhether he is so far out of the way.
Then Mr. Zimmerman comes to the indirect losses to the
nation. The second item, " $900,000,000 worth of time wasted
by wage workers and business men through the effects of
drink." He says it takes 40 or 50 cents Avorth of bad whisky
or beer to unfit a man for a whole day's work, which to the
average Avage worker means a loss of $1 to $2, and skilled
mechanics, contractors and business managers from $3 to $10,
and in case of the latter probably $50 for the day wasted in
a drunken spree and in getting over the effects. He then
alludes to the testimony of " a score of witnesses before the
Senate Committee on the relations between labor and capital,"
which testimony was given in the presence of the author of
this work, to the effect that many workmen when paid off
Saturday, immediately " go on a spree " and are hardly fit for
woBk on Monday, while many do not return to work until
Tuesday or even Wednesday. When paid on Monday they
frequently lose still more time. " Now when we consider that
much of the money spent in drink thus entails a loss of from
four to six times as much in wasted time it becomes plain
that my second item in the robbery account, $900,000,000, is
a low estimate."
His third item is $600,000,000 "for annual cost of paupers,
criminals, almshouses, asylums, jails, prisons, extra police,
criminal courts and prosecutions."
Then he proceeds to
assert that two thirds of all insanity and three fourths of pau14

210

THE

TE3IPEEAXCE

MOVEilEXT.

perism and crime, cost of criminal and police administi'ation,
etc., of buildings required and charity Tvhicli is made necessary
by drink, poverty, pbysicians' services (not one fourth of
which is ever paid for, but which is all the same a loss) , and
the " immense sum that might have been earned by drinkmade paupers, invalids and criminals," are chargeable to strong^
drink, and the Eeverend " Fanatic " thinks that $600,000,000
is reasonable for all this.
Then he figures the loss of the labor and capital converted annually into a worthless and accursed article at 81,000,000,000.
Xow as this article costs 8700,000,000, according to Mr.
Barrett, and §900,000,000, according to Mr. Zimmerman, and
the same labor and capital might have been employed in producing something useful instead, there appears to be great
moderation in fixing this item at 81,000,000,000. I would
raise that a few hundred millions ; but this is not my estimate.
Then comes the fifth item of $600,000,000, which he says
the 100,000 people killed annually by the liquor crime would
have added to societ^^'s wealth. He is not responsible for the
statement that 100,000 die in this way annually. Wise and
conservative physicians and expert statisticians say that. But
he says that an average of fifteen productive 3'ears is thus
taken from the lives of these 100,000 victims, or a total of
1,500,000 years, annually, and then cites ]\Ir. Atkinson as
stating that the " average yearly earnings of all who are
engaged in gainful occupations in the United States are $450,
which, by the way, I think is $150 too high. He fixes the
amount at $400, and finds a total of $600,000,000 annually
lost to society by the premature destruction of the productive
power of these 100,000 men who die fifteen years before their
time.
Mr. Zimmerman puts it as follows :
The drink biU
$900,000,000
Value of time wasted through the effects of drink
900,000,000
Paid to support paupers, criminals, etc
600,000,000
Value of time wasted in non-productive work by
men in the traffic, and by officials engaged in
caring for its victims
1,000,000,000
Value of time lost to society by premature death
of 100,000 annually
600,000,000
Total

$4,000,000,000

Mrs. Dr.

yohn P . Neivvian,
'/' Washington.

ONE

HUNDRED

THOUSAND

VICTIMS.

211

The worst thing about the ravings of Mr. Zimmerman is
that he seems to prove them to be true. It certainly seems to me
that until its friends secure the appointment of a National Commision for Inquiry into the alcoholic liquor traffic, and so vindicate their craft, that they must be willing to accept the modest
general estimate of the more conservative of the fanatics, to wit :
that they damage the United States at least $1,500,000,000
every year, while they accomplish no appreciable good. But
Mr. Zimmerman concludes with a reflection full of discomfort
to us all. "In our country the people are the sovereigns, the
real law makers
We therefore are the real ci'iminals
against God and humanity." Worse still — but this is for men
only — ^he insists that "more manifestly true is it that the
hands of every man who votes to legalize and perpetuate the
drink crime under license or tax laws, or in any form, are
red with the blood cf the 100,000 people it murders annually."
I am'sorry that Mr. Zimmerman said that. It makes me uncomfortable.have
I
long felt a great and complacent aversion toward the super-devilish depravity of the bnital fiends
who perpetrate railroad horrors for plunder and gain. But
when I thought I was so good a man, and only last Sabbath
gave a silver dollar, with some ostentation I fear, to the
heathen, to be told by a minister that I am one of (30,000,000
of good, civilized, people who murder 100,000 of their fellow citizens every year, and lose 5^4,000,000,000 by it besides, reveals me to myself in the light of both a villain and
a fool ; nor does it relieve me much if the cash loss be only
$1,500,000,000; neither am I really happy in the thought
that by sharp reckoning, and by casting out the worst and
biggest items, I am still a murderer at an annual loss in money
of 1700,000,000 only, and that the clergyman admits that
he is himself one of the same sad combination. Xow let us
indulge in the proudest exclamation of man, " I am an Amercan."
The liquor traffic should go.
The followins: table is taken from the Political Prohibitionist for 1886, and is inserted here for the convenience
of those who desire to pursue the traffic to its lair in the
several states. It contains the latest available data, is prepared with much labor and is of great value.

212

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

•sjonbiT
o_C5 c^o

CO i-M o t~^'~i'~it^'^^'^C2_t^co

CO CD CO 1:01-4

CD ^ CO w 00 :o C5 'M o

i-ToOCO ira r-Tr-H 12— ^-'^"-*
— ^— ' "^2^"^n!S
" ■' "— ""^
3!S£uS3
<N^CC i-H

(M
CO 01

-*lOCDOo«o<^5coeo^^ocoeocDCD^Ol-l— icot--^
OCO OCN
C5 t- C^O
L- O t-o-n<cocoTi<iocDi-it~tHo-a<t-iooo(NCD-*<>»oa
C ^ CD00^^01-^CDOD-»^CiOlOC^'^CO(Mt^OCDtO
C-1
O
CD D-*
CO
(M CD-*CO
■« O
CD ■<*
-*
t^C^CD'^(MCDt^'^C010i— i-^f— iGO-J^^tN-ri^OCO^t—

SJOTlbll

Ci^tr^CO

pain^stQ

O

t- CD 0^0

O

O

i^CS^CD

CD CD O

O

-H i— I CO Tji

CO
'^^■^co t-^
-*CD-*CDr-H
C^r('^r-(01COO^-<*<NCDiOCDi— )<Nt— IIOCDCNIOQO
coccDCDiracD^ococo'-*ioooi-rio'crr-rt-^--)ro<s"
«.
O
(M
C^OJCOrH
Or-1
O Ci rH rH
O
-^
'^

no

■1-*(M

•sn'sa
otiBf)
on'

o 10
O
CD CO

CO

CO CD
C2CD

■*
■=* C-1

1-1

C5CO

5 00 CO -*
^t^o5^-00

• <M
'^OOCD^COCD

CO 00

CD r-^^CD^t-^0-1 O^
coef
cDiot-^ci"
CO
-51CD0.1CO

-OOOt-COO-^
• 10 eg
;.OCDCOCOO(M
o cTct oocooo

r-TcD CO 00

• oow
• oco

10 1-1

•Bnon'BQ
'sjonbii

COOi^OO-^tCO CD
gt-O-^COCO

'^ffl
O CD CC^

o:j (f88l)

10U5C0
cot— f-H

sa:joA Jo •ojs[

o; (0881)

-co
-icj^

• CD r-( C2 t^ CO 00 CO
"(MCOCOO— 1- ■I -* ic c: CO M

•lCr-imCOr-ICOt~03lC05-<ilC1-*CO-^
• CO iO 10 tr- Oi O CO I— I (M (N CO CC 1^ 05 CD

10 CO C^CO lO

•i-IC-1C5'*rHCDC5m-*CDC0005COCOt-rtt-COt■rH(MlOOG10C;t-(M-3<OOt~CDi-HCOCO'^OCO
• t- CD <?1 CO CO ■* CO r-1 CD 1-1 tM (S r-l 00 CO
rl (M (N 1-H

doj:
JO -ONI
•sionbTT;
COQOCD-ri4QOt-OOOCOCOt-(MCDOCOO(>1^H^HCDCDiO^-^CO
■^.-ICOOa)COt-000
0'*lO(MCO'*05t-COCDOrHrH-*CO"Oi-H
r-^t' O O^rH^CD CO '^^'^^"^'~t*-^^'^'J^*^'^C^^^^^OD
^^

r-T

•SJai'Baa;

oJefeO

<NcfcD-*(S-i*lOrHCOOOCD-rfl-H'cOr-I'eO

rHOo"

I-lCDCOO!MUOi-(t---*^-*COlOt-CO<MCOI— C0>OTt(->j<T-(mcOCO
C^C^»^lr"?t-(y»l— (U^CDCOi— *rH^C^COC:5^<COO^HCO'S'COlOOCD
lOi— ((M
O0COCOr-(i— t
CMCDCOCOC^COrHC^
C-llO

•sjaAigja
..-HOOOt-

• i-t O .-I 00 00 C2 r
C40C3

•sjatBaQ

C^ rH

■OJt-CD • O h- -Tjl CO 10 00
lOCOOrH

05000»OCOCOO''^^HCri^t-C5i— (t*OC(MCDt—
r-1 Ol CD c:5
I— I (M CD O CD (M C^ (M
^ CO Ol iQ

aiBsaiotLM.

• lO ■"* lO CO

OOCDOC?-^-**-^
O CO w
^^ CO

rHOOt— CD^-'OrHC^CO^HOICOt-lCCOt-CO-^Ot— O5t-.lO00(
r- (
-^Ht— OOr-t
COCOt— »OCOCO-^t^COOQOCOOCDCDOOi— (I
rl CO r-< rl <>» rl

•sjatBSd
(MCMQO^CDO^COCOCDC^-^Cit— C5t-^HIr^lOC0CD(MC^O3O500t<iOt— f^t— Ot— -c^'<*
01C5»— CO'^CCCDC^CNIt-COCOt— ICtCO^

t^joi,

•siaxBaQ

8I13S3[OqAl

•sjateaQ

•f88t

eq(MlO-*ff>e0
•CD'KCOQOelOSIO
-CRi-Ii-I-H
•-*i-lCOrHrHO
0"1
(M'l-li-li-H
«O(M'00lOi-li-l-lO
CO

T-<rHlOOOOOOf-'C5C7it— t-05t— OCDOC0'^r-iC35OCDCD'^CD'"
C0C0CD"^O
t-<OCOIr-»Oi— If^JlO
OC-ltrr-tjii— (COlOlOt— (
C
(M rH
i-HCN
00 »Q O 'di I— ) CO
C35O50DC^-*i—
C0C0rMO3C0i-f-*^^C^tC0
— ^ .- — ^ ►— .« (t—
.^ ^^
t^ ^ ^ ^H o CO IQ ir^ t— uu >— ^ nj -IT T-i ^^
OCDC^tMOOCDCOCOOOt^COCD
,,C50t-COCD-^C5COCDOOOCOt-;0
C^OCDCOoJcoO

OOirH
OOCD^

.in
.1— (

10't-^CDTi<'r-5'cDr4(N

.1— l0005-*t--*C01»!MC3i-IC0l-OO
•CDt^-CDtr-C-t-'— (^OCDCOC't^HrHr-

t-CDCD • (M • 05 C5 CD t^OOCO C:5_CO ■<* COCO (N O C^^O
U|9J0A

coifTcrT
! ir-^ .CDC^t'ClC-CDt'OCOCOOOCltM'.*
' oTio'iyrH^'io lOin oTo ic CO co"o"o rH
lO^ICi
.CO
i-lt-li-l rH
i-l CD ":!< CO (» ffl rl r1 i-l CO ^ 1-1 i-l ■*

•088T m

^li^CDOCDCDCOmt— CO<3iOC5C5Cli— (CO
jt-Of-^CiCi^CO-rCOCOt— t— G0CDt--C^C2r-*

-t-fMC3:.^CO-^COODCOCOCOCDt-OOO.^CO

CD O CD CO C-l
CM CO CO 1-1 CD

O

as

i 05.3
cS 2 O 5 i3 c3

■-; rt cs
^

C3!H

o. • nm 03 ftS?
cr u rt
o 3 cs 5;;i.2

-o - -£m a S w t-i W W (J >=i ^ S i«=! »=i S S -S-c-ci-l;^ tz;

213
STATISTICS
*-cOtlrtC^OlOiaf-(C5rHlOOiOiO

■"? ^ cc P (Si C2 ■?! cr

OF

THE

TJQUOE

I Cs

O O O ^^ O CC

°l

CO

ts(S

Ij; iO O^ O r-1 e^ -i*

o3 a
o;3

: X c^ u-^

tc --t

o& c5 M cj^t^5 i t-;_3 — t^ 3 X S;
^^"^^C5
(M

'-5,
e^

00

ece^oi

15

j

■585

o u

CO~COO-*I— .-< -ooo-^co
^:^:rcccc-*i^ -t^coco*-*
-*x^. r-.r-^oo
•^■*t--is
XO— 'r-iiOOOCO

'^ h©I

c

.'-O;

c^t-^r^t^-^ o C5 . r— CO I

ci

*g

Cl

e»xt— oiso •aocoeit~c5-^coriqooocs^cox ■03« r-^u- ?i o; IS ; ■«
i-^xiO!^ooco looc^^
^r c c. a
Sx CO
■^^
i-T
o

•W*-^
•coco-*

^ . CO o r-*
^
^
CO

J3 O

:c — ^
^3;
oi^^x^-x
I rt'

Is

• CO rH M t— irj rt m 00 1—
-TSioicSc^ooopeo-*

C5 Si Ci — i-O r- — -o 1.0 CJ O
00- CO
c: t^t*« o t— 0-.

O ^

rHCOrHi— tC<rHOt-*COU31

.3

^5
o t>o

i-CCO-HCO'DOr^-l't^OCOOCOCO
CO o o 15 X CT i.o Si ^ CO r~ i.o X i~ccco o^oixiooootrit-^^xt^

r^Ciit^i— <-f^;:50— 'x:ooo»-iM
OCCJOt^C^CIXCOwCOirj-^iCOl

■ x-<coe»o»c

«cs a.
^^
eo
rn

•(N00"-i2i

< «o <MeiX -*r: -*;- ■—■ I ■- Ii oo ui: t~-^ Xo COoi oo
■*-,. -^-i-3«
^ ^ r? =t .-■ ■-?. >

1-4-W c
S.C c
>Ci^

1 o 01 ic «- CO t>

I^COr

kl

CC^
Ci

00

CO rH

f-!f-^

•2 »=

too «

t-C(y>ooo— '^ru^oot-i-frt
^!J«L0 04'^C0 01COC^CSO

^^3

- ^ _ _
--^ — Ol
CO_- O_ O t-^W
X ■* 35 C^Ol^O
^X rH
l-T'-HiPHCs'r-rao'r-J
CO
1-1
r-

I-TcO

0*

CO

eo-*o

^
CO t^ o oi —

O)

c; — . lo I- 1

fJoo-^

t-CO 00

»0 1— t O C^ 01 1— '
o t^ o o — ' cr: >o t- i-o •* 00 ^ 1.0 o;
o 00 r^o i-H X ^ irt CO t^ oi trt ** -<i<

•*JH s

coxcso^xxr^Ci-n-Cicor— t,-i^
•-•ceo rH o^ OiOtmis l-OCOia ;oCO
»^ — ^
^
l-Hi-H
i-H
rH

5,T! c

^^
__

Cj x S " '^ O

TRAFFIC.

Si
e_5 c

THE

214

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

One further matter in the valuable calculations of Mr.
Barrett : He finds an expenditure for liquor of about one
twelfth to one sixteenth as much as for the total cost of
support. He thinks one fourth of the people are consumers of liquor, therefore they would expend one fourth to one
third as much for liquor as for all articles of sustenance — provided that liquor consumers lived as well as the temperate,
industrious and thrifty. With the total cost of strong drink,
direct and indirect, falling primarily upon one fourth of the
population — according to Mr. Barrett's careful estimate — or
upon one fifth, which I think to be nearer the true number
who consume any considerable amount, the imagination need
not be called upon to magnify the sufiferings of the drunkard
and his family, when, unfortunately, he has any.
I also ask attention to this table :
CONSUMPTION

OF BEEK

AND

WHISKY

COMPAEED.

In the United States.
Distilled
liquors
YKAR.

1877
1878
1879
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885
1886

....

Malt

Vinous

liquors

liquors

sumption.
con-

siuned.
con-

sumed.

59,920,118
51,937,941
54,278,475
63,526,694
70,607,081
73,556,976
78,452,687
81,128,581

304 926,667
317,969,3.52 22,263,949
344,605,485 27,377,130
414,220,165,28,329,541
444,112,169,24,162,925
526,379,980!25,562,927
551,497,340 25,778,180
590,016,517,20,508,345
ficift IS! sRRion SSI Ran

drawTi for
with-

In Canada.

YEAR.

liquors
Dissumed.

con9-1 S7R san

72,'045,'681|644i295A16J22,349,577
Aver. 1st 5 yrs. 60,054,063 385,166,707 24,201,97.5
ATer.last5yrs.75,156,922 681,664,767 23,016,135
Increase
25 per ct. 50 per ct. —5 per ct
Increase, population in 5 yrs., about 15 per ct

tilled

con1877
1878
1879
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885.
1886

Malt
liquors
sumed.

con-

9,080,949
8,658,346
8,922,255
2,930,507 9,106,516
4,149,106
9,787,914
4,614,485 11,928,616
4,900,120 12,934,424
13,379,677
4,568,954
5,287,542 13,392,486

3,864,254
4,-569,377
3,933,916

Vinous
liquors
sumed.

con386,925
369,425
409,325
312,811
450,250
546,788
589,217
537,961
511,849

Aver. 1st 4 yrs. 3,799,513 8,964,403
369,621
Aver .last 5 yi-s.4,704,041 12,084,623
527,213
Increase.. .23.8perct. 34.8 per ct. 42.3 per ct.
Increase, population, 4 J^ yrs., about 10 per ct

While the average consumption of malt liquors in the United
States during the last five years of the period is 50 per cent,
more than the average consumption during the first five years,
the average increase in the consumption of spirituous liquors
between the same periods and compared in the same way is
25 per cent. In Canada the average consumption of beer
during the last five years increases 34.8 per cent, over the
average consumption of the four preceding years ; yet the
same comparison shows an average increase in the consumption of spirituous liquors of 23.8 per cent, and of wines of

THE

FIGURES

FOR

1886.

215

42.3 per cent. The increase in population in the United
States in five years, the period between which the two averao-e comparisons are made, is only 15 per cent. ; the increase
in Canada for four and one-half years, about 10 per cent.
Figures are taken for the United States from the Eeports
of the Bureau of Statistics. The figures were furnished by
the Canadian Department of Internal Revenue. The reason
why the comparison begins at 1876 is because the Federal tax
on distilled liquors since that time has remained practically
unchanged.
The following estimate, prepared for The Voice by C. B.
Cotton, is also worthy of careful study as showing the waste
of materials and perversion of industry to hurtful production.
Major Cotton having for many years been engaged in the
liquor business, and given careful study to special statistical
phases of the liquor question, is a reliable authority.
LABOR

EMPLOYED

BY THE LIQUOR

TRAFFIC,

1886.

Distillers, 6,242 ; rectifiers, 1.376 ; wholesale dealers, spirituous
liquors, 4,290 ; retail dealers, spirituous liquors, 11)0,121 ; brewers,
2,292 ; wholesale dealers, malt liquors, 3,012 ; retail dealers, malt
liquors, 8.400 ; distillers' employees, 62,420; brewers' employees,
45,840; rectifiers' employees, 6,880; employees, wholesale dealers,
spirituous liquors, 30,120; emplo3'ees, retail dealers, spirituous
liquors, 190,121 ; employees wholesale dealers, mult liquors, 15,060 ;
employees retail dealers, malt liquors, 8,409 ; total, 564,592.
MATERIALS

USED,

1886.

Bushels of grain, 19,195,332 ; gallons of molasses, 2,308,130.
Returning to the subject of the present cost of the liquor
traffic to our own country, I wish to place on record the
conclusions of Dr. Hargreaves as given by himself, after
careful study of the statistics of Col. Switzler, and the estimates of Mr. Barrett.
The investigations of Dr. Young, the former chief of the
Bureau of Statistics, were very thorough, and his conclusions
as to the retail cost of the various kinds of liquors are adopted by Dr. Hargreaves, who first submitted them to the examination ofan ex-retail dealer, and was informed that they
are rather less than more than the prices actually paid by the
consumer.

216

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

These prices are as follows :
Domestic spirits
Domestic malt liquors
Imported spirits
Imported wines
Imported ale, beer, etc. .

$ 6.00 per gallon.
20.00 per barrel.
10.00 per gallon.
5.00 per gallon.
2.00 to 3.00 per gallon.

Applying these prices to the amount of liquor consumed
in this country for the year 1886, and the total cost is
$914,675,205, or $214,695,205 more than the estimate of
Mr. Barrett. Dr. Hargreaves also insists with great force
that so large is the increase in quantity sold on account
of adulterations, and by " crooked whisky, " that 20 per
cent, is not too much to add to the amount which is included
in the statistics of the government. " The business of selling oils, essences and chemicals for reducing, adulterating
and mixing alcoholic liquors is carried on very extensively
in most of our large cities and towns. . . Indeed it is so
common that no secret is made of the business."
I insert the following tables ofTDr. Hargreaves, which are
in my belief not an excessive statement of the cost of the
traffic in the years named. The second table contains only
the aggregate cost of each year, but the result is worked out
with the same detail as for the year 1886.
THE

QUANTITY

AND

COST

OF LIQUOKS

IN THE

TmiTED

STATES

FOK

THE

YEAR

1886.

[From Repoi't of Bureau of Statistics.]
Domestic spirits
70,751,355 gals., at $6 gal., $424,508,13fr
Domestic malt liquors, 20,669,235 bbls
640,746,288 gals., at $20 bbl., 413,384,700
Imported spirits
1,410,259 gals., at $10 gal.,
14,102,590
Imported wines
4,700,827 gals., at $ 5 gal., 23,504,1.35
Imported malt liquors
2,221,432 gals., at $ 2 gal.,
4,442,864
Total
Add Domestic wines

719,830,161 gals., costing
$879,942,419'
17,366,393 gals., at $2 gal.
34,732,786

Total
THE COST OF ALCOHOLIC

737,196,554 gals., costing

$914,675,205

BEVEKAGES DURING THE TEN YEARS, 1877 tO ]
IN PERIODS
OF FIVE YEARS.

S, INCLUSIVE^

Cost for five years ending June 30, 1881.
1877
1878.
1879
1880
1881

Cost for five years ending June 30, 1866.

$635,613,534 1882
585,783,762 1883
620,075,930 1884
733,816,495 1885
800,112,580 1886 . .

Totalflve years
$3,375,402,301
Annual average, five years...
675,080,460
Total ten years ending June 30, 1886.
Annual average for ten years

$875,665,344r
944,629,581
899,898,490
834,277,48a
879,942,419

Total five years
$4,434,413,316
Annual average, five years..
886,882,662
$7,809,815,615
780,815,561

Commenting upon these estimates, Dr. Hargreaves says :

LET US HAVE THE TRUTH.

217

The above costs are exclusive of domestic wines and cider, the wine
alone consumed as given in Mr. Switzler's report was 186,461,736
gallons, and at the low estimate of $2 a gallon, would cost the consumers during the ten years $372,923,526, or an averao-e of
$37,292,352 a year. What the cider would cost drank as champagne and other beverages, it is impossible to estimate, but is
undoubtedly a large sum. I am therefore confident that my
estimates of the prices of liquors, the quantity consumed with their
cost annually in the United States, would be found not more than
the actual amount, if it could be ascertained, which is not possible,
as so many difficulties meet us in our efforts. At the best we can
only approximate, but I hope the time is not far distant when Congress will, in defiance of the liquor interest, appoint a commission
of inquiry into the alcoholic liquor traffic, and furnish the country
with more official information than at present obtainable, and that
we may be able to say, within a few million dollars, what the
actual cost of alcoholic beverages is to our people, as well as their
relation to trade and commerce, and pauperism, crime, vice and
disease, and the other evils that have their chief source in alcoholic
drinks and the traffic in them throughout our nation. The truth is
our only desire, for exaggeration and falsehood will not aid us or
any other good cause.
Let us have the truth, for
"Ever the truth comes upi)ermost
And ever is justice done."
The poetry is very encouraging and I quote it sometimes
myself, but in this connection it seems like the recommendation by the owner of his graphiphone, who said it would
reproduce its impressions of sound forever. Being asked
how he kne"W it, he replied ''we have tried if." If the truth
ever does get uppermost it will be the end of the liquor
business in this world, but there are the consequences of all
that has been, which will last forever.
"The saddest is this, it might have been."

If one half the cost of domestic wine and cider be added to
the average cost of other liquors, w^e have an aggregate of
over $800,000,000, so that the yearly cost of intoxicating
beverages is three times greater than all the expenses of
the general government, including the interest on the public
debt. It may be said then, to illustrate this enormous sum by
comparison, that the direct losses by liquor yearly are more
than half the entire amount of all the money, greenbacks,
bank bills, gold, silver and all, in circulation in the United

218

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

States ; ten times the sum paid out for the support of the
common schools of the country ; and, the average duration of
school attendance being little over five years, enough yearly
to educate, after the fashion that we do educate in our common
schools throughout the country, two generations of our cliildren. The colleges of the country cost yearly, according to
the last census, in round numbers five millions of dollars and
the number of students is sixty thousand. The liquor waste
would pay the tuition of ten million students and so give
collegiate education to more than half, instead of one in every
three hundred, of the school population of the country who
now receive it. This is more than the average common
school attendance, so that, if it could be so applied as to reach
all daily, the liquor money would pay for liberal courses of
study to all the children of the country. In fact, it would be
cheaper to make the college system of education as free and
universal as the common school, than to maintain the liquor
traffic. Beside the relief from the great evils of intemperance,
who can conceive of the positive good which would spring from
such a common school, where all the knowledge of the world
should be free to the poorest child.
In 1880, by the census, there were four times as many
drinking places as churches, nine times as many liquor sellers
as ministers, and twelve times as much was paid for liquor as
for gospel in the United States. The cost of the civil war
was included in the eight years of the administrations of Lincoln and Johnson, and the expenses of the government during
that period were $8,500,000,000, or about $1,000,000,000
yearly — hardly more than the direct cost of the annual drink
bill, to say nothing of the consequences of its consumption.
In two years the drink bill amounts to more than the
national debt. The money wasted for liquor yearly would
buy homesteads of one hundred and sixty acres at $1.25 per
acre of the public domain for three million families, or fifteen
million — one fourth — of our people. One year's saving of
liquor would buy land for everybody who is without it. In
two years, or at most three, enough would be saved to settle
every family in a comfortable home. But this saving must
include the liquor waste of the rich as well as of the poor. The
pensions of our soldiers are scarcely one tenth of the cost of
our strong drink.

FIGURES

AND

ESTIMATES.

219

In a striking work by Mrs. Elizabeth Thompson, entitled
"Figures of Hell ; or, the Temples of Bacchus," published
some years since, and fi-om which I have received much assistance in some of these calculations, the actual loss to the country
by reason of the liquor traffic is estimated at not less than
$1,171,291,518, which "would build and equip thirty thousand miles of railroad ;
pay the cost of the public
schools for fifteen years ; erect and maintain twelve thousand
colleges ; send out and support one million two hundred
thousand missionaries ; pay the entire national del)t in two
years ; the entire debt of the country, national, state and
municipal, in less than four years ; construct six hundred firstclass ocean steamers ; erect and maintain three thousand seven
hundred and fifty hospitals, libraries, homes for the aged, etc. ;
provide one third of the people of the United States with
homesteads of one hundred and sixty acres each ; run the postoffice department for thirty-four years : . , . . pay our foreign
consular service for one thousand seven hundred and twentyfive years ; purchase, at seven dollars per l)arrel, one hundred
and sixty-seven million, three hundred and twenty-seven
thousand, three hundred and fifty-nine barrels of flour, and
pay the salary of the President of the United States for twentythree thousand four hundred and twenty-five years."
On the 27th day of Deceml)er, 187(3, in a speech made in
the national House of Representatives, in support of a joint
resolution introduced by myself, proposing an amendment
to the Constitution of the United States in regard to the
manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors, I presented certain facts and statistics from the census of 1870, and from
other sources mostly official, which I prepared with great care,
and although the speech has been in circulation since that
time, and several hundred thousand copies have passed under
the eyes of intelligent and sometimes hostile critics, if the
fairness, moderation and accuracy of this statement have ever
been assailed, the fact has not come to my knowledge.
It is true that this statement is based upon our condition
when our population was 38,000,000, whereas now it is
60,000,000 — but the records do not indicate a decrease of the
extent of the traffic. On the contrar}^, although the consumption of distilled spirits has decreased from 2.07 to 1.24 gallons

220

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

per capita, on the other hand that of malt liquors has increased
from 5.30 to 11.18 gallons by each person in the country. I
therefore feel that I may fairly introduce this statement as evidence, the truth of which has passed unchallenged and practically admitted to be true in a time of controversy for more than
ten years, and that it is illustrative of conditions still substantially unchanged in this country — save only that at last the
people begin to turn over in their sleep.
After a general discussion of principles and methods I then
said :
"I now desire to present in the best manner I can a statement of facts bearing upon the effect of the manufacture and
use of intoxicating liquors on the wealth, industries and productive powers of the nation ; also upon its ignorance,
pauperism and crime. I have endeavored to authenticate
every statement by careful inquiry. The information is drawn
from the census returns, from records of the Departments of
Government, reports of State authorities, declarations from
prominent statisticians and responsible gentlemen in different parts of the country. Much of it is to be found, with a
great deal more of similar matter, in a very valuable book
published the present year. The author is William Hargreaves, M. D., of Philadelphia. No one who has not fought
with figures, like old Paul with the beasts at Ephesus, knows
how it taxes the utmost powers of man to classify, condense
and present intelligibly to the mind the mathematical or
statistical demonstration of these tremendous social and economic facts. The truths they teach involve the fate of modern
civilization.
"In 1870 the tax collected by the Internal Revenue Department was upon 72,425,353 gallons of proof spirits and
6,081 ,520 barrels of fermented liquors. Commissioner Delano
estimates the consumption of distilled spirits in 1869 at
80,000,000 gallons. By the census returns, June 1, 1860,
there were produced in the United States 90,412,581 gallons
of domestic spirits — and of course this was consumed with
large amounts imported besides — but there are very large
items which escape the official enumeration. These have been
carefully estimated as follows :

Mrs. FraJices jf. Barnes,
Superintendent '" Yoiaig Women's Work,'' National W. C. T. U.

COST

PER

FAiMILY.

221

Domestic liquors evading tax and imported smugGallons.
gled, at least
5,000,000
Domestic wines
10,000,000
Domestic wines made on farms
3,092,330
Domestic wines made and used in private famOies 1,000,000
Dilutions of liquors paying tax by dealers
. . 7,500,000
26,592,330
"This amount added to the total produced in 1860 would be
107,004,911 ; added to amount on which was collected tax in
1870 would be 99,017,683 gallons.
"It is well known that the great mass of alcoholic liquor is
consumed as a beverage, and it will fall below the fact to place
the amount paid for it at retail by the American drinker at
75,000,000 gallons yearly. But take the very modest estimate of Dr. Young, Chief of the Bureau of Statistics, who
makes the following estimate of the sales of liquors in the
fisf?al year ending June 1, 1871 :
Whisky (alone), 60,000,000 gallons at $6.00,
at retail
$360,000,000
Imported spirits, 2,500,000 gallons at $10, at
retail
25,000,000
Imported wine, 10,700,000 gallons at $5.00, at
retail
53,500,000
Ale, beer and porter, 6,500,000 gallons at
$20.00 a barrel, at retail
130,000,000
Native wines, brandies, cordials, estimated . .
31,500,000
Total

$600,000,000

"I am satisfied that this is much below the real amount, but
it is enough.
"This is one seventh the value of all our manufactures for
that year, more than one fourth that of farm productions,
betterments and stock, as shown by the census.
"Dr. Hargreaves estimates the retail liquor bill of 1871 at
$680,036,042. In 1872, as shown by the internal revenue
returns, there was a total of domestic and foreign liquors
shown into the hands of the American people of 337,288,066
gallons, the retail cost of which at the estimated prices of Dr.

222

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Young is $735,720,048. The total of liquors paying tax from
1860 to 1872— thirteen years— was 2,762,926,066 gallons,
costing the consumer $6,780,161,805. During several of
these years the government was largely swindled out of the
tax, so that no mortal knows how far the truth lies beyond
these startling aggregates.
"Dr. Young estimates the cost of liquors in 1867 at the same
as in 1871— $600,000,000— and exclaims : ^t would pay for
100,000,000 barrels of flour, averaging two and one half barrels to every man, woman and child in the country.'
"Such facts might well transform the mathematician into an
exclamation point. Dr. Hargreaves, who goes into all the
minutim of the demonstration, dealing, however, only with
bureau returns, declares that the annual consumption of distilled spirits in the United States is not less than 100,000,000
gallons annually, and this makes a very small allowance for
'crooked whisky.' Take now Dr. Young's moderate estimate
of $600,000,000 annually, and, relying upon the official
records of the country, in sixteen years we have destroyed in
drink $9,600,000,000 — more than four times the amount of
the national debt, and once and a half times the whole cost of
the War of the Rebellion to all sections of the country, while
the loss of life, health, spiritual force and moral power to the
people was beyond comparison greater. The lowest estimate
I have seen of the annual loss of life directly from the use of
intoxicating liquor is 60,000, or 960,000 during the period
above mentioned ; more than three times the whole loss of the
North by battle and disease in the war, as shown by the
official returns.
" The assessed value of all the real estate in the United States
is $9,914,780,825 ; of personal, $4,264,205,907. In twentyfive years we drink ourselves out of the value of our country,
personal property and all.
"The census shows that in 1870 the state of New York spent
for liquors $106,590,000 ; more than two fifths of the value
of products of agriculture and nearly one seventh the value of
all the manufactures and nearly two thirds of the wages paid
for both agriculture and manufactures, the liquor bill being
little less than twice the receipts of her railroads. The liquor
bill of Pennsylvania in 1870 was $65,075,000; of Illinois,

ANNUAL

LOSS

TO

THE

NATION.

223

$42,825,000; Ohio, 58,845,000; Massachusetts, 25,195,000;
,New Hampshire, 5,800,000; Maine, where the prohibitory
law is better enforced than any^vhere else, 4,215,000, although
Maine has twice the population of New Hampshire.
"Dr. Hargreaves says that there was expended for intoxicating drinks in —
1869
1870
1871
1872

$693,999,509
619,425,110
680,036,042
735,726,048
Total

....

Annual average

$2,729,186,709
.

.

.

$682,296,677

And he says the average is larger since 1872, exceeding
$700,000,000.
"Each family, by the census, averages 5.09 persons, and we
spend for liquor at the rate of $81.74 yearly for each. The
loss to the nation in perverted labor is very great. In 1872
there were 7,276 licensed Avholesale liquor estal)lishments and
161,144 persons licensed to sell at retail. It is said that there
are as many more unlicensed retail liquor shops. All these
places of traffic must employ at least half a million of men.
There were then 3,132 distilleries, which would employ certainly five men each — say 15,660. The brewers' congress in
1874 said that there were employed in their business 11,698.
There would be miscellaneously emplo^'ed about l)reweries
and distilleries 10,000 ; in selling, say 500,000. In all, say
550,000 able-bodied men, who, so far as distilled liquors are
concerned at least, constitute a standing army constantly
destroying the American people. They create more havoc
than an opposing nation which should maintain a hostile force
of half a million armed men constantly making war against us
upon our own soil. The temple of this Janus is always open.
Why should we thus persevere in self-destruction ?
" There are 600,000 habitual drunkards in the United
States. If they lose half their time it would be a loss of
$150,000,000 to the nation in productive power, and in wages
and wealth to both the nation and themselves every year.

224

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Dr. Hargreaves has constructed the following table :
The yearly loss of time and industry of 545,624
»
men employed in liquor-making and selling . $272,812,000
Loss of time and industry of 600,000 drunkards 150,000,000
Loss of time of 1,404,323 male tipplers .
. 146,849,592
Total

$568,861,592

And he adds that investigation will show this large aggregate is far below the true loss.
"By this same process 40,000,000 bushels of nutritious
grain is annually destroyed, equal to 600,000,000 four-pound
loaves ; about eighty loaves for each family in the country.
Dr. Hitchcock,
President of Michigan
State Board
of
Health, estimates the annual loss of productive life by reason
of premature deaths produced by alcohol at 1,127,000 years,
and that there are constantly sick or disabled from its use
98,000 persons in this country.
Assuming the annual producing power of an
able-bodied person to be $500 value, and
this annual loss of life would otherwise be
producing, the national loss is the immense sum of
$612,510,000 00
Add to this the losses by the misdirected
industry of those engaged in the manufacture and sale ; loss of one half the
time of the 600,000 drunkards and of the
tipplers, as their number is estimated by
Dr. Hargreaves
And we have
........
The grain, etc., destroyed . . .

.

568,861,592 00

$1,181,371,592 00
.
36,000,000 00

Dr. Hitchcock estimates the number of insane, made so annually, at 9,338, or loss
in effective life of 98,259 years, at $500
per year
.........
Number of idiots from same cause, an annual loss of 319,908 years ....

$1,217,371,592 00

$49,129,500 00
159,954,00000
$1,426,455,092 00

STATISTICS

SHOWING

LOSS

OF

TIME

AND

MONEY.

225

Deduct receipts of internal
revenue tax (yearl875) $61,225,995 53
Receipts,
about
500,000
state licenses, at $100
50,000,000 00
$ 111,225,995 53
Annual loss to the nation of production
$1,315,229,096 47
Annual value of all labor in the United
States, as per census of 1870

.

.

$1,263,984,003 00

Losses from alcohol in excess of wages of
labor yearly

$51,245,093 47

"This calculation includes nothing for interest upon capital
invested, for care of the sick, insane, idiotic — it allows alcohol credit for revenue paid on all which is used for legitimate
purposes. In England the capital invested in liquor business
is $585,000,000, or £117,000,000. It was proved by the
liquor dealers before the committee of the Massachusetts
Legislature in 1867 that the capital invested in the business
in Boston was at least $100,000,000, and in the whole country
it cannot be less than $1,000,000,000, or ten times the amount
invested in Boston. The annual value of imported liquors is
about $80,000,000. It may be that the above estimate of
losses yearly to the nation is too high. Perhaps $500 is more
than the average gross earnings of an able-bodied man, and
there may be other errors of less consequence. But any gentleman isat liberty to divide and subdivide the dreadful aggregate as often and as long as he pleases, and then I would ask
him what good reason has he to give why the nation should
lose anything from these causes.
PAUPERISM.

"I cannot detain the House with full statistics from the
various states in regard to the pauperism occasioned by alcohol, but not less than 130,000 widows and orphans are left
such in our country annually by liquor drinkers, and from two
thirds to four fifths of the inmates of our poor-houses are sent
there by drink.
CRIME.

"The statistics of crime are even more astounding.
In the
report of the United States Commissioner of Education for
15

226

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

1871, page 541, I find this statement: 'The fourth fact is
that from 80 to 90 per cent, of our criminals connect their
course of crime with intemperance. Of the 14,315 inmates
of the Massachusetts prisons, 12,396 are reported to have
been intemperate, or 84 per cent.' Ninety-three per cent,
of those confined in Deer Island House of Industry are confined for crimes connected with liquor. ' In the New Hampshire prison 65 out of 91 admit themselves to have been
intemperate. Reports from every state, county and municipal
prison in Connecticut made in 1871 show that more than 90
per cent, had been in habits of drink by their own admission. '^
The warden of the Rhode Island state-prison estimates 90 per
cent, of his prisoners as drinkers. These relate to those who
have been guilty of the more serious offenses, not mere
every-day arrests for drunkenness and disorderl}^ conduct.
" The report of the Board of State Charities of Pennsylvania
for 1871 says, page 89 ; 'The most prolific source of disease,
poverty and crime, observing men will acknowledge is intemperance.'
''Mr. William J. Mullen, the well-known and highly-esteemed prison agent, in his report for 1870, says : 'An evidence of
the bad effects of this unholy business may be seen in the fact
that there have been 34 murders within this city (Philadelphia)
during the last year alone, each one of which was traceable to
intemperance, and 121 assaults for murder proceeding from
the same cause. Of over 38,000 arrests in our city within the
year, 75 per cent, were caused by intemperance. Of 18,305
persons committed to our prison within the year, more than
two thirds were the consequence of intemperence.'
"Judge Allison, in a speech delivered in Philadelphia in
1872, says : 'In our criminal courts we can trace four fifths of
the crimes that are committed to the influence of rum. There
is not one case in twenty where a man is tried for his life in
which rum is not the direct or indirect cause of the murder.'
"And Philadelphia is the city of brotherly love. She is excelled by no large city in the world in all the elements and
evidences of enlightened Christian civilization. She has
immortalized herself in our centennial year by a queenly
majesty of municipal deportment and a magnificence of patriotic hospitality which are a source of love and pride to her

SUGGESTIONS

FOR

A COMMITTEE

OF

INQUIRY.

227

countrymen and have won for her the cordial and unstinted
admiration of mankind. And it is a delightful relief for my
aching head, as I copy and compile these statistics of damnation, to record the illuminating and illustrative fact that
on those centennial grounds, from which intoxicating liquors
were rigidly excluded, and where the aesthetic and diviner
cravings of humanity were fed as from the gardens of God,
among all the millions who wandered through that world of
the last and highest results of civilization on earth, not one
arrest was made for intoxication during the whole term of the
exhibition. The infinite significance of that philosophy which
not only demands prohibitory laws to restrain evil, but also
the provision of food for the mind and stimulants to all the
innocent, enlarging and ennobling tendencies of the soul,
could not be more strikingly illustrated and enforced.
"Mr. Speaker, the records of New York, with her more than
ten thousand liquor shops, one half of which are unlicensed,
and which Mr. Oliver Dyer says would line both sides of a
street running from the Battery out eight miles into Westchester county, having, by the report of Superintendent
Kennedy, made, some years since, an average of 134 visits
each daily, with 50,844 arrests for intoxication and disorderly
conduct in the single year 18(38, and with 1)8,861 arrests for
crimes of every description, nine tenths of which were the
result of drink ; all these I have examined, but I have no
heart to dwell upon them. I cannot endure their longer contemplation. The mathematics of this infinite evil are only
paralleled by the tremendous calculations of astronomy, and
as I quit the appalling theme I feel as though I had been
calculating eclipses on the firmament of the pit.
"If we can do no more for this agonized land, groaning and
travailing in despair, than to institute the commission of
inquiry into the statistical evidences which are waiting everywhere for proper authentication, and a bill for which, having
passed the Senate, reposes in the embrace of a committee of
this House, we shall have accomplished something for which
the ages to come will rise up to bless our memory ; for I sincerely believe that nothing is required to work out our salvation from the great evil which we are considering but authentic
knowledge, generally diffused among the people.
In the

228

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

pressure of the momentous affairs by which we are surrounded,
I have not been able to summarize and classify as I would
otherwise have done this statement of such facts as appear to
me to be derived from reliable sources ; but I have done the
best I could, hoping that abler minds will turn their attention
to the subject, and that Congress will no longer neglect to
institute official inquiries, with a view to such ultimate legal
action as may arrest an evil which, if not arrested, will go far
to destroy the American people.
BEARING

OF THE SUBJECT

UPON

THE

EDUCATION

OF THE PEOPLE.

" Some paper has sneeringly alluded to this proposed amendment as a measure of temperance reform for posterity. Chiefly
so it is ; and all the voices of humanity cry out for its adoption. All thinking men admit that the condition of posterity
depends upon intelligence and virtue, and these are transmitted and developed by the educational institutions and processes of the country, of which by far the most important is
the common school ; and over that alone has the government
any control. Contrast for a moment the means of education
in virtue and intelligence with those which exist for the promotion of vice and crime and misery in this country, and then
let those sneer who will at a measure which aims to save
posterity from the fate which, if there is no reform, will overtake us in national life, just as surely as the time finally comes
when the individual inebriate, whether in the horrors of
delirium or the stupidity of the consumed sot, drops into the
tomb of despair.
The census of 1870 show that there are in the United States
141,629 schools, with 221,042 teachers and 7,209,938 pupils
who attend in the aggregate — the average is less — costing
$95,402,826. Of these, 125,059 are public schools, with
183,198 teachers, 6,228,060 pupils, costing $64,030,673
yearly.
There are 12,955,443 between the ages of 5 and 18 years
who should be at school, leaving 4,845,505 who do not
attend at all. About 740,000 of these are engaged in labor
of some kind; but there must be more than 3,000,000 who
do not go to school at all.

Dr. Hargreaves says that ninety-

Mrs. N. H. Knox,
President W. C. T. C, of Neiu Hampshire.

OUR

NATION'S

DRINK

BILL.

229

nine hundreths of them are children of the intemperate, and
he makes the following tabular statement showing the relative
efficiency of the "two educational systems," as they are
operated in Pennsylvania, whose condition is not discreditable
in comparison with the country at large :
EDUCATION

IN

KNOWLEDGE

AND

VIRTUE.

Schools, colleges, etc., in Pennsylvania
.
.
16,090
Professors and teachers .....
18,783
Pupils and students, etc., in regular attendance .
542,076
Cost for educational purposes in Pennsylvania $8,399,723
EDUCATION

IN

IMMORALITY

AND

Drinking places in Pennsylvania

.

Persons emplo3'-ed in liquor shops .
Tipplers and drunkards
Direct cost of liquors in Pennsylvania

VICE.

.

.

.

.

.

.

23,606

45,490
802,604
$80,000,000

More than nine times as much money spent to destroy as
there is to save ' posterity ' by these two systems. And
again he says : 'Though within the last 20 years our teachers
have increased from 25 to 30 per cent., and pupils attending
school more than 50 per cent., yet crime has increased more
than 60 per cent.'"
CENSUS

RETURNS

OF

1880,

AND

OTHER

EVIDENCE.

There is no department of the temperance work where the
voice of Dr. Harjjreaves is not heard. The followinj? statement by him is worth many volumes. It is based upon the
last census and is the best epitome of its lessons upon the
waste and woe of the liquor traffic which I have seen. I omit
a few passages which previous matter renders superfluous.
OUR nation's

drink

bill,

and

some

CONSEQUENTIAL

RESULTS.

The effects of the use of intoxicating drinks, and the traffic in
them, upon society are many sided — social, moral, religious and
economical. The social relations are visible everywhere, and chiefly
the effects of drunkenness on the family. The family is the source
and foundation of all society. Drinks mar or destroy family life.
No sorrow or cruelty is absent from the blunted affections and
inflamed passions caused by drink ; turning life's blessings into
curses. The drink, by the poverty it produces and vile passions
it arouses, makes the family almost impossible ; and the social

230

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

decay it causes is seen everywhere in the decline of physical
health. The very children, from the drink, inherit diseased or
weak bodies and brains from their parents.
Social well-being is hindered, and its very existence endangered
by drink blunting and blinding the conscience. The judges,
magistrates and criminals all unite in their declarations of the close
relation of drink and crime. Eighty-two per cent, of crime in
Suffolk county, Mass., was traced to drink. Nothing so blunts the
moral sentiments and destroys the influence of religious teachings as
drink. But in this paper it is designed to examine briefly the
economical and statistical aspect.
DRINK-SHOPS

AND

DWELLINGS

IN

THE

UNITED

STATES.

In the United States in 1880, there were 8,955,812 dwellings, of
which 163,522 were taxed retail liquor places, and 11,610 taxed
retail malt liquor shops, or a total of 175,133 drinking places taxed
to sell liquors by retail. These-drink shops, if placed together,
would make a city with more dwellings than there are in Philadelphia (146,412) and Pittsburgh (24,280) combined, and as many
dwellings remain as will make another city as large as Sacramento,
California ; or they would make four cities as large as St. Louis ,
Mo., or two cities larger than New York. Indeed, they would
make a city with more dwellings than New York city, Brooklyn,
Albany and Syracuse, and 1,307 dwellings to spare.
The drink-shops of the United States, if arranged in one street,
allowing each a frontage of thirty feet, would form a street with
drink-shops on each side 497 miles long, nearly from Philadelphia
to Cleveland, Ohio ; or, placed side by side, would extend on each
side of the railroad track from Philadelphia nearly to Cleveland.
INDIRECT

COST

AND

LOSS

AND

DIRECT

COST

OF

DRINKS.

It is estimated that the indirect cost and loss from the mischiefs
arising from the use of the drinks, viz. : Pauperism, crime, disease,
etc., aiiiounts to fully as much as the direct cost of drinks. This is
doubtless true, as shown by the following estimates of the indirect
costs and losses flowing from the liquor traffic in the United States
in 1880:
Loss of productive labor of 586,472 persons in the
liquor trades
$283,236,000
Loss of productive labor of 700,000 drunkards, 175,000,000
Loss of productive labor of 2,138,391 moderate
drinkers
222,392,664
Amount carried forward,

$680,628,664

ANNUAL

COST AND LOSS.

Amount brought forward,
Loss of 66,660,792 bushels of grain destroyed in
breweries and distilLries
Loss of time and cost of medical attendance and

231

$680,628,664
33,330,390

medicine in sickness caused by drinks ....
119,368,576
Loss to employers by time lost by drinkiug workmen
10,000,000
Cost of supporting 83,899 defective persons by
drink as insane, etc., etc
16,779,800
Cost of supporting 59,110 paupers made such by
drink, at $100 a year,
5,911.000
Loss of labor of 59,110 paupers and vagrants, at
$300 per annum,
17,733,000
Cost of supporting 39,481 prisoners at SlOOa year, 3,948,300
Loss of labor of 39,481 prisoners at §300 a year, 11,844,300
Cost of police, prosecutions, court expenses, losses
by jurors, witnesses, etc
15,000,000
Total indirect cost and loss from use of drink,
Annual average cost of liquors of 3 years (1880-1-2)

8924,544,036
803,198,130

Total annual direct cost of drinks and loss, etc., $1,727,742,166
These estimates of the annual cost and loss are only approximations, yet they are doubtless below the real cost, as every one at
all acquainted with the subject will testify. Seventeen hundred
million dollars annually for vice, crime, demoralization, impoverishment, misery, disease and death ! In the words of Tlie Times
(London) in a leader, " Drinking baffles us, confounds us, shames
us at every point. It outwits alike the teacher, the man of business, the patriot and legislator. Every other institution flounders
in hopeless difficulties, the public house holds its triumphant
course !"
The above applies to the United States as fully as to England.
ESTIMATED

EXPENDITURES

FOR

NECESSARIES

OF

LIFE.

The value of articles of general consumption used in the United
States will be about their value at the place of production ; for
by comparing the value of articles of common use imported and
exported, the imported only exceed the value of exported by a few
million dollars ; not more perhaps than the value of articles remaining in stores and warehouses, etc., unsold. We will therefore
estimate that our people expend annually for necessaries of life as
appears in the diagram, p. 132 :

232

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
Ocj:5fM00'*Ocr>(M00^OCD<MC/0'*OcOG^100^O<^(MC0Tj<

EXPENDITURES

FOR

NECESSARIES

OF

LIFE.

233

Recapitulation :
For food and food preparations,
.
. $963,000,000
Bread., etc.,
302,000,000
Butter and cheese,
....
186,000,000
Sugar, etc.,
234,000,000
Coffee, tea, cocoa, etc.,
.
.
.
145,000,000
Articles of wear (men and women),
.
482,000,000
Textiles,
437,000,000
Cotton goods,
210,000,000
Woolen goods,
160,000,000
Boots and shoes,
.
.
.
196,000,000
Worsted goods,
33,000,000
Carpets,
31,000,000
Cost of liquors in 1883,
.
.
. 944,629,581
Wages paid for meclianical and manufacturing industries, .
...
947,953,795
Expenditures for drinks (an average of 3
years, '80 to '82),
.
.
." 803,000,000
The cost of drink for 1882 was 875 million dollars.
Thus :
There was spent for drink nearly three times as much as for
bread, and nearly as much as for all kinds of food.
Drink costs over four times more than for butter and cheese.
We spend nearly four times as much for drink as for sugar,
etc. ; and coffee, tea, cocoa and chocolate cost a little more than
one sixth the cost of drink.
Articles of wear cost a little more than half the cost of drink.
All textiles of 1880 cost about one half the cost of drink in '82.
Cotton goods cost about one fourth that of drink.
Drinks cost five times as much as woolen goods.
We spent four times more for drink than for boots and shoes.
Twelve times more was paid for drink than for worsted goods
and carpets.
Drinks cost in 1883 only about three millions less than was paid
for wages in 1880 for mechanical and manufacturing industries.
By spending one hundred dollars for the aggregate manufactures
of the United States, by the census 1880, $14.20 goes to labor;
$100 spent for boots and shoes, $21.71 is for labor; for clothing,
$17.42; for furniture, upholstery, etc., $23.71; for hardware,
$24.17; for cotton goods, $16.91; woolen goods, $12.86; for
worsted goods, $13.55; and for men's furnishing goods, $18.34;
while $100 spent for liquors will only give to labor $1.23. To
average a day's work at $2, one hundred dollars spent for boots
and shoes will give one person work for lO/gijy days ; for cloth-

234

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

ing, 8^^Q days; for furniture, etc., H^o^ days; for hardware,
12^yo days ; for cotton goods, 8^^^ days ; for woolen goods, 6j^rs
days; for worsted goods, 6^^f days ; and for men's furnishing
goods, 9^Vo days ; while one hundred dollars spent for liquor will
only give one man work for a little over ^^ of a day, or a little
over a half-day. It must be clear to every one that to spend
mone}^ for intoxicating drinks inflicts serious injury on the trade and
industry of the country and deprives our laboring classes of work
and wages. Workmen ! the drink question is more important to
you than the tariff or any other question before the country. Abolish
the drink traffic, and there will be work and good wages for all.
LOSS

BY

THE

DESTRUCTION

OP

FOOD.

The grain and other products destroyed by the brewers and
distillers to produce drink (articles unfit to nourish the human
body) are a total loss. To make intoxicating drinks, over sixtysix million bushels of the various kinds of grain are destroyed
annually. In 1882, there was destroyed in distilleries 2,192,719
bushels of malt; 301,241 bushels of wheat; 4,228,669 bushels of
rye; 20,051,239 bushels corn; 168,488 bushels oats; 452,330
bushels mill feed, and 2,121,804* gallons of molasses. There were
destroyed in breweries 39,201,697 bushels of barley. Total grain
destroyed in distilleries and breweries 66,660,792 bushels, which at
fifty cents a bushel would be worth $33,330,396. The average
weight of grain used for liquors is about fifty-three lbs. per bushel,
and yields forty lbs. of flour, makes sixty lbs. of bread, or fifteen
four-pouud loaves. The 66 million bushels would give a grand total
of 990,000,000 four-pound loaves of bread, or more than 99^ loaves
for each family in the United States in 1880. This does not
include the grain destroyed in making the imported liquors used,
nor the native wines, 30,000,000 gallons, as given in the Report of
Agriculture, 1880, but only liquors paying tax as per Internal
Revenue Report for 1882. These loaves used as paving stones
would pave a street fifteen hundred miles long, or a road along the
line of the railroad longer than from Boston to Omaha, Nebraska.
The drink not only ruins our people financially, but undermines
virtue, blunts the conscience, effaces memory, enfeebles understanding, dethrones reason, and destroys life. It is certainly bad
to destroy the grain, but it is very much worse to destroy the grain
and ruin the people also. It is a sin and a crime to destroy food
even when enough is left to feed the people. The food annually
destroyed would feed not less than three millions of our people.
*The average yield of grain was 3,694 gallons spirits per bushel — one
gallon molasses yielded .781 of a gallon of spii-its. See Internal Revenue
Keport, 1881. p. lix.

GRAIN

DESTROYED

EN

DISTILLERIES.

235

Every bushel of grain made into liquor increases the price of what
jemains. Dear bread -means had trade. When people have to
pay all, or nearly all, they earn for food, they cannot buy clothing
and other necessaries. It is the same in the end whether Q(j million
bushels of food are destroyed in breweries and distilleries or rot in
the fields by rain and mildew, and cut down by grasshoppers. You
may say the farmer gets his money for the grain, and it emplovs
labor and consumes products, etc. True. If I buy a barrel of
flour for So, and then throw it into the river, I cause a consumption
of products. It is wasted, you say. How so? I paid the flour
merchant — he paid the miller — the miller paid his men their wages
— the farmer receives his money for the wheat, and the money is
circulated. But you answer, you have not the barrel of flour you
paid for — you have nothing for your money. There's the point !
Neither the buyer nor consumer receives value for the money paid
for liquor. It is an entirel}' useless commodity, and hence the
materials used in its manufacture are destroyed ; the labor employed
to produce the drink, and the money paid for it, are entirely lost.
With the destruction of the flour or grain the loss ends ; but with
money spent for drink there begins another series of losses — financial, physical, mental and moral — the least of which is the money
paid for liquors. Therefore, if the grain was simply destroyed
without being made into liquors, it would be vastly better for our
people. No nation can practice such waste and continue to
prosper.
MONEY

SPENT

FOR

DKINKS

AND

OTHER

PURPOSES.

There has been spent for intoxicating drinks during this century
(from 1800 to 1883) more than twenty one thousand million
dollars (21,683,959,223), which is over four thousand million
dollars more than all imports into and over six thousand million
more than all imports from the country within the same period.
In the three years from 1880 to 1882 (inclusive), over two thousand four hundred millions were spent for drinks, or a little less
than all our exports, and about four hundred million dollars more
than all our foreign imports. These three years drinlv bill was two
hundred millions more than the value of all our agricultural products ($2,213,402,564) in 1880. Our last year's (1883) drink bill
($944,629,581) was only about three millions less than all the
wages paid in 1880 for all manufacturing and mechanical industries
($947,953,795), and only about nineteen millions less than the
estimated expenditures for food ($963,000,000) in 1880.
The value of the products of all manufacturing and mechanical
industries of the United States in 1880 ($5,369,579,191) was 154 million dollars more than our last six years drink bill ($5,204,927,246).

236

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Our last ten years drink bill ($7,206,598,304) was only 336
millions less than the value ($7,572,981,758) of all our agricultural
products and all the products of our mechanical and manufacturing
ndustries in 1880.
Our people in less than three years spent in drink the value of
all our products of agriculture, and in about lO-i- years expended
the value of all the productive industries of the country. In other
words, if a fire was kindled on the first of January every eleventh
year, and continue burning during that year — if every article as
fast as produced in all our factories, workshops and mines, and all
our farm products, as fast as gathered, were thrown into this fire,
and burned up until only the ashes remained, such destruction of
the products of labor would not do as much harm nor inflict upon
our people as much pecuniary injury as is produced every eleven
years by the use of and the sale of intoxicating drinks. To destroy
annually the products of our factories, workshops and farms of
the value of the money spent for drink, by fire or flood, would be
a great loss, and cries of woe and sorrow would be heard all over
our land. Yet this destruction would not deprive our people of the
ability and power to supply their loss with other products, as do
the drinks for which the mone}' is spent.
The assessed value of the real and personal property of the
United States in 1880 was $16,902,993,543, and the real value
about double that amount, or $33,805,987,086. "We spent during
the present century (from 1800 to 1883 inclusive) nearly 22
thousand million dollars ($21,683,959,223), or more than two
thirds the real value of all the property, real and personal, that
has accumulated in the nation since the landing of the Pilgrim
Fathers on Plymouth Rock.
If the real cost of liquors and the consequential results of their
use could be ascertained since the Declaration of Independence of
the United States, it would doubtless be found that more money
has been spent than would buy to-day all our farms, factories,
workshops, mines, railroads, houses, furniture, clothing, stores,
warehouses, and everything they contained, with breweries, distilleries and liquor shops thrown in. If the money spent since the
Declaration of Independence for drink had been spent for useful
and necessary articles, the real and personal property would doubtless be nearly double what it now is, our people more intelligent, moral and religious, and our industrious classes free from the
taxation imposed for charities and corrections.
The ten years drink bill (from 1870 to 1879) was $6,706,913,406,
or fifteen hundred millions more than the permanent investment
($5,182,445,807) in all the 87,891 miles of railroads operated in

DR.

HAEGREAVES

237

DIAGRAM.

1880. Our drink bill (§5, 567, 52, 076) for the eight years from
1875 to 1882 inclusive, was 385 millions more than the investment
in all the railroads in the country. The drink bill of 1880
($733,616,495) was 72 millions more than the aggregate income
(§661,295,391) of all the railroads in the nation that year.
No people, however favored, can continue to prosper who waste so
large a proportion of labor value for poisonous drinks. No wonder
that hard times and stagnation of trade should follow such waste
and the violation of economic laws.
I here insert another of Dr. Hargreaves' diagrams, somewhat similar to the hist, but conveying other facts and comparisons to the mind. These diagrams, conveying instruction
througli the e^'^e, let in a ilood of light, and a most startling
landscape of waste, folly and misery it is.
DB. HAKGIiEAVKS' DIAGRAM,
ING niUXK IX ISSo, WITH
8AKIES OF LIFE IN 1880.

.Millions.

COMPAniNO EXPENPITUKES FOR INTOXICATCUIEF ITEMS OF EXPENIJITUKES FOli KECES-

All Food.

1000
$944.CostofDrinks,1883, $963.Wage3paid,1880,forHanuri's,etc.,$947
960
fli
920
cq m
.00
880
840
m
800
m
760
DC
3
UJ
i^j
720
CO
CO
080
O
040
CO
CO
lU
uCD
000
LjJ
d B
10 BJ
iH
560
CO
^ wM
6rHLi
520
IH
o (M : wiH
480
CO
CO
6 CQ
{/i- o S
m
440
O
400
O
UJ
m oj
o
CO
C/J
O ni^BH
iT
5
<:O O m HiI>
CO
3G0
az
«: cc
320 WBh
m COoo
U.
280
o
CO
o
zr
rA
o
240
CO
flHj^BHH CD
200
S&n :3 CO SSHH^HHHHHHl
^^Hb^^I^^H^Bb
160
120
80
MB JBB|HpB " JMHIBBBBI
40

m

1
H

H
HH

1

1

1

1

911

t-

BHI
jHm

mHIi

i-t'^ III
11 IHBI

BIHSHHSHhBBHHH^
02-

1

<*

CHAPTER XII.
ALCOHOL,

DESTROYS

THE LIFE AND WEALTH

OF THE WORLD.

The Fate of all Civilized Nations AfFected by the Liquor Traffic — Coiisumi)tion of Spirits in the United Kingdom — The Amount per Capita
— Money enough Spent for Liquor from 1831 to 1881 to Purchase the
Entire United Kingdom — The Case in France — The Use of Liquor
Doubled in Forty Years — Report to the French Government — Tlae Homo
of the American Despot — Telling Facts and Figures Showing the
Vast Extent of the Traffic — Germany, Russia, Persia, the World.

THE

unity of the human race is the great social and political fact. God hath made of one blood all men that do

dwell on the face of the earth. That unity is true not only
of all the living, but hereditary influence largely controls
posterity ; so that every individual man is aflected by the
total of all that has been done or suffered by all nations and
all individuals who have already existed, and he is responsible
according to the measure of his powers and opportunity for
the condition of all who are to be unto the end of time.
Especially is it true that the fate of all civilized nations is
vitally affected by the liquor traffic, and that they suffer from
a common evil which united action alone can cure. We may
feel a special interest in the Anglo-Saxon race, by reason of
our common origin, language, history, literature and institutions. But the rapidly increasing facilities of inter-communication and of interchange of person, property and intelligence
are rapidly abolishing all barriers and distinctions. Railroads,
telegraphs and telephones are everywhere. They unite the
woild as by a universal emotion. They make their own conditions reduce
;
all things to homogeneity, and dominate wherever they are, as the light rules the day. It is clear to one
who can see, that Asia and Africa will soon arise from the
sleep of ages, break loose from the chains of the past and unite
their billion of inhabitants with the more advanced western
nations. Not many centuries and perhaps not many decades
hence, the grand federation of all nations, tongues and peoples
238

ALCOHOL

THE

FOE

OF

CIVILIZATION.

239

under the whole heavens, which is the ultimate destiny of man,
will be an accomplished fact. Alcohol is the special foe of
civilized man; and, if destroyed, it must be by the assertion
of the power of the whole over the evil wherever it exists ;
and that exertion of international power must reach the
manufacture, the transportation and the sale. The appetite
of the world will contrive to be satisfied, so long as the thing
it craves exists within its borders. True that the most important ofall action is by each nation within and for itself, and
by exclusion of the hurtful commodity from its territory.
But, so long as the appetite and the manufacture exist, so
Ions: smu2:<>:lin2: and all forms of illicit trade will to some
extent perpetuate the evil in spite of the most stringent local
and national restrictions. International action cannot be expected until the nations, one after the other, comprehend their
reciprocal danger. Then they will assail the liquor traffic by
the treaty-making power, which, combined with moral suasion,
the forerunner and creator of all right sentiment and correct
action, and Avith state and national laws, Avill in the end conquer, ifit can be conquered — and it can be — this chief foe of
man. We are therefore interested to know to what extent
this evil prevails beyond our own domain, and the prospect
of its prevalence or extinction in the rest of the world.
The United Kingdom naturally first claims our attention.
The following tables, furnished to me as the best attainable
by the Bureau of Statistics are the latest I have been able to
secure, and are sufiiciently comprehensive to convey to the
mind a reasonabl}^ accurate idea in figures of the state of the
liquor traffic in England, Scotland and Ireland.
Annttal CoNsmiPTioN OF Wine axd
the Average CoNSi.MPnox per Capita
OF Population
in the United Kixgdom during Each Yeak, from 1S81
TO loSb, Inclusive.
[From the accounts relating to the trade and navigation of the United Kingdom.]
YEARS.

1S81
1882
1883
1884
1885

Wine consumed.*

1
I
!
1

* The consumption is the net imports.

Total.

Per capita.

Gnllnmt.
]4,92r),955
U,;^ 1 7.3-29
1 4 1 .H .-2 02
13.^02,600
13,425,287

.40
Galloiia.
.41
.43
.37
.39

240

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Annual Consumption of Domestic and Foreign Distilled Spirits and tub
AvEKAGE Consumption per Capita of Population in the United Kingdom during Each Year, from 1871 to 1885, Inclusive.
[From

the "Statistical Abstract for the United Kingdom,"

1885.]

Distilled spirits consumed.
YEAliS.

1871.
1872,
1873,
1874
1875
1876
1877
1878
1879
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885

Domestic.

Foreign.

Total.

Gallons.
24,5(53,993
27 279,519
29,322,087
30,321,928
30,059,043
30,534,265
30,361,163
29.884,951
28,508,850
29,047.303
29,334,161
29,251,754
29,421,590
2-^,745,893

Gallmis
10,728,545
8,081,303
11,872,196

Gallnna.
35,292,538
35,360,822
41,194,283
40,6.54,695
43,615,876
12,956,83::
17,794,496
1 0,332,76'; 48,328,761
10,492,759 40,8.53,922
9,316,526 39,201,477
10,459,768 38,968,618
6,970,499 36,017,802
5,.H3,90; 34,878,066
S.382,938 37,634,692
36,638,6.59
7,217,068 37,901,874
9,155,981
9,282,951 36,631,756

27,348,805

Per capita,
Gallons.
1.12
1.28
l.ll
1.25
1.33
1.46
1.23
1.15
1.14
1.00
1.04
1.07
1.03
1.01
1.05

Annual Consumption of Domestic and Foreign Beer and the Average Con
sumption per Capita of Population in the United Kingdom, during
Each yE.\.R, from 1881 to 1885, Inclusive.
(Prom

the statistical abstract for the United Kinardom and the account relating to the
trade and navigation of the United King<iom.]
Beer consumed.*

TEARS.

Foreign.

Domestic.

Total.

Per capita.

Gallons.
Gallons.
83.90
1,184,934,633
33.65
1,187,643,926
1,179,205,928
33.13
33.73
1,028,738
1,212,623,960
82.79
983,632
1,191,270,005
*The British beer barrel lias been computed at 36 gallons and the ale gallon at
1.22 United States gallons.
jggi
18S-7
1SS3
1884
1885

Gallons.
572,585
766,712
918,411

Gallons.
1,184,362,048
1,186,877,214
1.178,287,517
1,211,600 222
1,190,286,373

From these tables it appears that if we take the aggregate
of distilled and fermented drinks, reducing the latter to distilled, as in the former calculation in ascertaining the per
capita consumption of alcohol (see p. 201), the population of
the British Isles consumed per capita in 1885 as follows :
Gallons

Distilled spirits ....
36,631,756
Wines, 13,425,287 gallons ^ 5 = spirits 2,685,057
Beer, 1,191,270,005
'^
-^ 5 =
234,254,001
Total distilled spirits

.

.

273,570,814

The population of the United Kingdom was, in 1871,'
31,513,000, in 1876, 33,089,237, and in 1885 must have been
not more than 35,000,000.

^S^

fP?>v

«*. -

T-

^

Mrs

Mary A. Livennore.

MR. hoyle's tables.

241

We have then a per capita consumption of distilled spirits
of 7.8. gallons by the people of Great Britain and Ireland.
The total consumption in the United States in the year 1886
was 217,720,925 gallons, or 3.63 gallons per capita.
Here is the foe which will silence the drum beat of the
British Empire, and sink her proud navies in an ocean of
liquid fire. Let Russia bide her time, and be sober. God
save the Queen's dominions from strong drink. They need
fear no other foe.
The tables (pp. 242,243) are prepared by Mr. Wm. Hoyle.
They are mainly from government sources. The notes are
by our Bureau of Statistics and the information is of the
highest verity attainable upon personal authority. They will
be of value to those who wish to study the subject thoroughly.
The total cost of intoxicating liquors to the United Kingdom from 1830 to 1881, inclusive, was £4,926,865,122, or
$24,634,325,610, which, if saved and invested at moderate
interest, would i^urchase the entire kingdom. This makes no
account of the indirect losses which are as much more. It is
not an exaggeration to say that strong drink has cost the
United Kingdom during the last fifty years an amount of
wealth which her people, but for it, would have produced and
saved, sufficient to buy the British Islands and the United
States.
Is it any wonder that the people mourn ? Mr. Hoyle himself, by a careful computation, fixes the waste of wealth which
would have accrued, if the money spent for liquor from the
year 1830 to the year 1882, inclusive — fifty-two years — had
been invested at five per cent, interest, at £14,274,218,810,
or $71,371,094,050. This is twenty times the national debt
of Great Britain, forty-seven times more than our own, nine
times the cost of our civil war, four times the amount of all
the national debts of Europe and America, and if properly
invested would, according to Mr. ]\Iulhall, produce an annual
income of almost $9,000,000,000, which is thirty times the
ordinary annual expenses of the government of the United
States, including interest on the public debt.
And all this paid out for a curse ! " What fools we mortals
be !" Compared with us, the man who paid forty shillings to
be hung was a Solomon in wisdom and a Rothschild among
financiers.
16

5,69

6 6,16
8,1,064 (D
2,56

THE

TEMPEEANCE 3 3, MOVEMENT.
,16 18

lO i-l(N 02 M O 00

1

'-^CDt'CDf-lt^OO

o
H So
03
ii=«-ti

"g 1^0

02 too

T)*^-*

t-^ toco ir: ^5D
^COrHrHCOlO"0O^
1

QJ

CD

8^
P<is3

■^ CC -.*< CO CO CO CO

•NrHOSOlOCOlCO
^^^^^
^ ^
Qo CO
t^t-^t-^o^oT

f-' 9

. • CO t- O CO tC t^ (M

bu

ertOOt--*OOCD-*
O COCOCOCOCOCO(M
CD -^cooJoooT
. -* t^ Ci t^ c^ 1:
1
WOfSIOCDlOQOlO
S, t-^io <r»^e« 00 CO 00
Q rH t-^o t-^o r^CO
CSCOOt-OCOfMO
o t-; CO e^ "* ^ lo c^
^OOt^t^CDCOCOCO
D rH t-^f-^'lo'cJ'oOCO
• CO CO lo CO U5 1^ e-i

GO
.,

o a

§■3

CO

^

Q

^ GO

tH

to

e

tfj

■r*
u

«

j=

l-l
l-l

5o

H

w

0

H

1^
S
Pi

.i

OO

M

Q

ij
ij

12;

n

s

H

o
E^

to

O
ot2

w

M

a

EJl

cc

H

So

^^

'^,-(OOC5GOODOO
D ^ t^ ^ r-H t- 00 t(N <M IM rt n .M r-l

■cooimyico^ro

SOO^iOOCRiGOOO
g O C-^CO lO Oi 02 CO
.2 00 CDt-^t-T^lOCO
^^COOOit'COlM-^
e "* ''i'^"* "^o oo.
Ci >*
1-H '^
o CO
oTt-^cD
oTco
CO CO CO
CO

p

orj

H

^O

Q
0

^OiCDCOWOi— ICD(M
Sl^inCOGO lO (NrH
.S 1^00 00 O t-^tO G^i
F-SoOrlCO^t-OlO)
B -* CO '^ lo -^iNffi
Gi rH OOoToO 00 00

•OOC010i-HC005^
20Dt^i— HCOOrHCD
g (N rH C- CD ^ t- «
.-^iOOOlOCOOCOO
,2 OOOODCO t-^O^
e05_QOC0 03THt-;^lO
Ci> ororoToTooodao
(S C^ <M (S (M (M (M

6

<
<

C

Pn
rH

t< a O I

O O o ■* t- iq ^.^

W^COCOCOIO^^^
t-^t^Tr-TlO oToD 00

"^SSfiiii

w

^■^

,'»Or-(»Oi— IC005C0
J'lMClCDCDt^OO^
«--*e^0OCOO5CD t5 CDO-* COCOffTcO

CO

^
o

»
H
^

5 ocTocTcD oo
"eiO lOO lOO o o
(i t-^lr-^l-^t-^io lO o

^"^i-lt^^"
<=> oT
CO
^^ CO
O ■* CO 00 00
;:sioioc~ioooi-Hio
Q t- -* 00 03 ^ CO 03

l^i
M

1^
H

*^

^QOOOOOO
g O O CD O O O O

. t^ 02 t^ Oi CD -.* CD
eot^ooo — iO".i^cr^

o

1^

. o

'i

H

IS

olla

!?;

.9 S

COt-^QOoJ
OrHci
t~1— r-- 1^ 00
00 00
00 00 00 TO 00 00 00

,
,34,66617,0,
9,
,99
5,
,260
,38 ,
3,

H

m

9,

^
o

OJ

. <N O Ol CO 05 CO Ol
?lOi-HOCOMt2o

0

H

«101010"0000
^ 00 t^co -.e^io"io -<*"
V-i-t-c-t^ioinio
e CO CO CO eo c-^r-^tS CD CD CO cooTaTor
oi-ii-irtrHOicnas
^-•OOOOOOO
00 ooco oot-^t-^t^

0

w n
►-J n
H «

o

52,33

O

,83

Ph
l-l

i^cor^-t-'* lo^co
Q CD CO IJ^Oi^X CD -^

w d
ho .

3 r
Ions

1

^

00 a

31,28

fl

H

45,
0975
44,

O
Q ^
H
W

72,29

^

60,84
97,.')2

1,28

2,33

00
QO

0,84
5,2,
0929

(5 oirT oJco CD lo o

o
H

.4
02

lloni

T-ll-Irt
. Oi « -* (M 0^ t- rt
ect-.OOO'^OCOO
i,oai_io CO co^os
6 OOCO coco O rH CD
Sa'^t-HGOt'COtMO

1,27

P5

ID

4,75

1

Gallons.

"<il -^ M< -^ GO -.* -.^
. >0 02 lO Ol t^ CD (M

w

W

o*5
<i>

o 1^

. ^ 05 CO -.^^ C-1 O 00

~CTlOOtC-*(>^i-l

K

ars.

■rt O

1

,133,444,7
,089,635,0
,117,316,7

242

^S <B g !

COST

OF

INTOXICATING

243

LIQUORS.

Statement Showing the Population, Total Estimated Cost, and Average
Cost pek Capita of Population of Intoxicating Liquors Consumed in
THE United Kingdom for Various Years from 1820 to 1865 and for Each
Year from 1830 to 1882.
[Prepared by William Hoyle, Esq., London, England.]

YEAH.

1620
182
1830
1835
1840
1845
1850
1855
1860
1865
1870
1871

Population.

Aver- 1
Total estimated cost of
age ofcost ,
intoxicating
YEAB.
liquors I
liquors conper
i
sumed.
head. 1

20,807,000
22,571,000
23,820,000
25,443,000
26,500,000
27,072,000
27.320,000
28,183,000
28,778,000
29,861,000
31,205,000
31,513,000

Dollars.
245,469,448
326,188,175
327,502,204
391,888,6:!1
377,688,491
.348,798,267
392,814,.W1
373,557,'.m;1
414,999,888
517,988,124
577,8;i0,082
611,168,678

Dollars.
11 80
14 45
13 73

1872
1873
1874
15 33 1875
14 31 1876
12 87 1877
14 31 1878
13 26 1879
1880
14
17 2:J
34 i 1881
18 51
19 24

1882

Total cost
esti- of
mated
intoxicating
Population.
liquors
sumed.con-

31,835,000
32,124,000
32,426,000
32,749,000
.33,093,000
33,446,000
33,799,000
34,1.15,000
.34,4(>8,000
:M,929,000
35,278,000

Dollars.
640,4;iS,6.51
681,381,596
687,845,695
695,309,310
716,780,746
692,051,490
691,9()2,282
623,612,119
595,072,092
618,407,860
614,402,2;i9

ofcost
age
Averliquors
head.
Dollars.
20 12
21 33
21
21
per
21
23
21 66
20 64
20 46
18 25
17 25
17
58
17 52

Table Showing the Estimated Cost of Intoxicating Liquors Consumed, the
Number of Apprehensionh for Drunkenness, and the Total Numher of
Convictions for Crime, with the Number of Lunatics in the United
Kingdom for Each Year from 1S(K) to 1882, Inclusive.
[Prepared by William Hoyle, Esq., London, England.]
DiaTED

KIK6DOM.

1

UNITED

KINGDOM.

Totel
number of
numher
Total of
YEAR. E.stlniatod
Estimated
AppreNnratotal cost of sions for tions
for ber of
convictotal COM of sioiis for tions for Ijer
luna-|
lienof
intoxicating
crime
lutoxic-itiriK AppreNumconvicdrunkcnnesB.
crime
f^om all tics.
liquors.
enness.
liquors.
from all
causes.
drunkhuiilauscs.
tics.
lunaDollars.
Dollars.
.38,058
I860.... 414,999,888
640,4:18,651
423,.591 .58,(U0
255,803
1872....
88,361
1.51,034
1861....
413,370,763
2(J3,510 39,()47 1873....
456,705
(;0,296
83,196
681,381,.5!)(i
4S(;,7S(; (i2,027
1862. . . . 432,473,994
272,1)69 41,129 1874....
182,941
687,845,695
•:?05,567
94,908
695,.309,310
28;i,Wl 4.3,118 1875....
512,425 (;3,793
1863. . . .
185,730
94,745
448,147,1.')2
52(i,915 (U,916
300,731 14,795 1876....
1864. . . . 504,7,53,438
100,0<J7
- 519,839
716,780,74(; 20:i,9^9
691,078,190
.53H,232
1<.»4,.540
105,310
1865. . . . 517,988,123
200,184
312,8.s'2 45,950 i877
691,962,282
104,365
554,418,241
1866....
339,091 47,t>48 1878....
506,281 66,636
623,612,119
100,.357
535,910,207
3:35,3.59 49,086
1867....
178.429
517,;373 68,.538
347,4.58 51,000 1879....
5.32,176,809
1868....
5<I5,072,0<»2
111,465
69,885
1880....
172,a59
122,310
372,707 53,177 1881.... 618,407,860
1869. . . . 649,357,787
174,481
530,966 71,191
614,402,239
131,870
389,712
54,713
1870....
577,8:30,102
575,593 73,113
189,697
1882....
142,343
611,168,659
1871....
407,859 56,755
YEAR.

Now let us turn to France — our ally in the Revolution and
the second Great Republic of the world.
It will be observed that in France, the land of vines, th^
home of song and wine, where the fermented liquors with their
mild poetic and etherializing influences exclude the baser and
destructive products of distillation from the ambrosialized
stomachs of the people, exactly the same amount per capita

244

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

was consumed in the form of distilled drinks in the year 1885
as in the United States in the year 1886, to wit. : 1.24 gallons. (See p. 198.) This is indeed a "striking" corroboration of the arguments of the advocates of the use of fermented liquors as a temperance beverage, and shows up the
"continental lie" of those who cannot find any drunkenness in
countries where they consume the milder intoxicants. These
are the men who have milder intoxicants to sell — or who
desire them to drink — hence their facts.
FRANCE.
Annual
Production, Importation, Exportation and Consumption of DisTILLED Spirits in France During Each Year from 1879 to 1885, Inclusive.
[From "Annuaire de la Statistique de la Fi-ance," and "Journal de la Society de
, Statistique de la Paris," 1886.]
Consumption.
Total
TEAR.

Production. Importation.

production
and
importation.

1879
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884...
1885

Gallons.
39,305,300
41,767,073
48,112,!;65
46,666,347
,^3,123,160
51,102,735
49,214,871

Gallons.
5,287,2.30
6,938.768
0,491,053
7,568,497
4,427,595
5,077,215
5,445,177

Gallons.
44,592,530
48,705,841
54,604,018
54,235,844
57,550,755
50,179,950
54,660,048

Exportation.

Gallons.
9,001,932
7,972,914
7,970,5.37
7,091,168
7,847,989
7,775,104
7,801,970

Total.

Gallons.
35,590,598
40,732,927
46,633,481
47,144,676
49,702,766
48,404,846
46,858,078

Per
capita.
1.081
.94
Gallons,
124
1 32
1.25
1.28
1.24

Note. — The liter has been computed at .26417 United States gallon. For Avant of later
information, the population of France in 1881 was made the basis for the consumption
per capita in each of the above years.

Annual Production, Importation, Exportation, and Consumption
IN France during Each Year from 1879 to 1885, Inclusive.

of Wine

[From. "Annuaire de la Statistique de la France," and " Journal de la Soci^te de la
Statistique de Paris," 1886.
Consumption.
Total
YEAR.

Production. Importation.

and
production

Exportation.

importation.

Total.

Per
capita.

1879
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885

Gallons.
1700,658,302
895,950,492
1,119,106,810
1,025,648,611
- 1,219,.540,964
918.809,677
753,835,512

Gallons.
77,616,078
190,745,903
207,076,444
199,098,034
237,245,608
214,766,881
216,186,293

Gallons.
778,274,380
1,086,696,395
1,226,183,254
1,224,746,645
1,456,786,.576
1,133,576,558
970,021,961

Gallons.
80,485,6.51
65,714,427
67,949,702
09,166,997
67,130,141
64,296,614
68,757,533

Gallons.
Gallons.
697,788,729
18.52
27.10
1,020,981,968
80.75
30.67
1,155,579,648
36.88
1,15S,233,5.=)2
1,389,656,431
28.36
1,068,279,942
23.93
961,264,428

Note.— The liter has been computed at .26417 United States gallon. For want of later
information, the population of Prance in 1881 was made the basis of the consumption per
capita for each of the above years.

ALCOHOLISM

m

PEANCE.

245

If we reduce the gallons of wine consumed to distilled
liquor of five times the strength of the wine we have —
The per capita consumption of gallons .
. 1.24
23.92^5 =spirit gallons .
.
.
4.78
6;02
or six gallons consumed in France by the same rule which
gives us a per capita consumption in the United States of
3.63, almost twice as much. I have no official data of the
consumption of malt liquors in France ; but there must be
some, however small (Dr. Eddy and Rev. F. F. Parker fix the
amount at 51,000,000 gallons), which would increase the disproportion .The per capita consumption is probably greater in
France than in England. Again I call attention to the theory
of those who would reform the world witli fermented drinks !
Does not this prove that Avherever, if anywhere, the consumption of distilled drinks is curtailed it is to be attril)uted to
efforts by education and law to destroy the whole traffic,
rather than to the substitution of one drink for another when
both are consumed to get the same thing, to wit : the alcohol,
and nothing but the alcohol which they contain ?
I take the following from the Medical Press of July 21,
1887 ;
"At the last meeting of the Academic de Medecine, M.
Rochard read the report of the committee which that body, at
the instigation of the government, had elected to examine the
question of alcoholism in France. M. Rocliard stated that the
consumption of alcohol had doubled in forty years, and that
alcoholism had increased enormously ; he considered that it
was a regular wholesale poisoning due to the inferior quality
of the alcohol employed in the fabrication of wines. The
spirits of beet root, potatoes and grains, so much employed
to-day, contain deleterious principles in very strong proportions, which an imperfect distillation has been unable to
extract. The Spanish and Italian wines which now fill the
market are artificially charged with alcohol of very inferior
quality."
No wonder that the vitality of the French people is threatened ; that the population is stationary ; that the army is
made up of round-shouldered boys, and that their Legislature,

246

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

in alarm, has ordered a national inquiry, with a view to the
removal of the national curse. Give France twenty years of
sobriety and, if surrounding nations continue in their cups,
she will, if she be foolish enough to fight so near the millennium, overthrow all her enemies and float the tricolor above
every capitol in Europe.
That I may not be thought to draw unwarranted inferences
as to the eflects of intoxicating drinks in France, I quote from
the Paris ConstUutionel of 1872, as cited in "Alcohol in History," a new and valuable work by Richard Eddy, D. D.
"The habit of drunkenness has increased in France year by
year since the beginning of this century. The French race is
deteriorating daily. In forty years the consumption of alcohol has tripled in France." And a French magazine says :
"Drunkenness is the beginning and end of life in the great
French industrial centers among women as well as men.
Twenty-five out of every one hundred men and twelve out of
every one hundred women in Lisle are confirmed drunkards."
France has her national commission of inquiry into the
liquor traflSc. She needs it and she knows it. We need one
in the United States, and we know it. But our government
is in the hands of the liquor traflSc, and we cannot get it, lo !
after these twelve years, during which "we have petitioned,
we have remonstrated, we have supplicated, we have prostrated ourselves at the foot of the throne " of King Alcohol —
but in vain. " Our petitions have been slighted ; our remonstrances have been met with additional violence and insult,
and we have been spurned with contempt from the foot of the
throne." There will be another Declaration of Independence
— a day of vengeance and a Yorktown further up the Potomac.
The worst tyranny on earth is inflicted by the abuse of the
forms of popular government, and our own is already well
nigh revolutionized. The seat of tyranny in our government
is not in the executive chair nor in the chamber of the senate.
Our popular assembly is the home of the American despot ;
and unless the existing order of things be clianged, government by an acknowledged king will be better than the one
man or the ring power, which conceals its irresponsible
supremacy under the forms of freedom.

CONSUMPTION

OF

SPIRITS

IN

247

GERMANY.

GERMANY.

Let US turn to German}^ the home
thinkers of the world.
Annual

of the

profoundest

Production, Importation, Exportation, and Consumption
of Distilled Spirits in Germant during Each Year from 1870 to 1881, Inclusive.
[From " Statistisches Jahrbuch fiir das Deutsche Eeich," 1882.]
Consumption.
Total

FISCAL

YEAR. Production. Importation.

production
and

Exportation.

Per

Total.

importation.

capita.
Proof
1870
1871
1872
1873
1874
1875
1876
1877-78..
1878-79..
1879-"80..
1880-'81..
Avera
11 y

- ---

ears
—
ige foi-

gallons.
45,939,163
43,059,710
45,46.3,(y)7
.50,1(^5,88;^
.54,973,777
.57,351,307
53,86-1 ,2(«
.52,!«m;,085
,55,079,445
.53,S37,K46
57,747,5<>2
51,856,571

Gallons.
7f)6,0ft3
924,.595
818,927
951,012

Gallons.
4(;,705,2.5<i
43,984,305
4(i,2,s2,58t

1,188,76.5
1 ,:}20,850
l,:{47,2(i7
1,1.3.5,931
1,131,931
1,2(^,016
977,429

5I,11(),S1I5
56,162,.542
.5S,(i72,1.57
.55,21 1, .5.30
54,102,011;
66.215.376
.5;'), 105,S62
58,724,991

1,08:1,097

52,ft39,668

Gallons.
16,220,0:18
12,1^)3,743
13,,>^68,925
7,079,7.5t;
13,7(^3,2,57
10,56(),SOO
10,4:54,715
14,714,269
14,.529,350
18,042,811
16,008, 70-i
13,446,253

Gallons.
Gallons.
1.00
30,485,218
1.03
31,330,562
1.27
39,202,828
1.16
1.27
37,247,970
42,:W9,285
48,105,357
1.32
1.43
44,776,815
1.14
39,387,747
1.11
41,68(;,026
1.14
1.19
.39,097,160
40,682,180
39.493,415

1.19

Note.— Tiie liter lias been computed at .26417 United States gallon.

This is the great beer-drinking nation as we generally
suppose, but note that she consumes per capita nearly as
much of ardent spirits as ourselves.
Annual Production, Importation, FLxfortation and Con.somption
in Germany during Each Year from 1872 to 1885, Inclusive.

of Bbbb

[From " Statistisclies Jalirbuch fiir das Deutsche Reich," 1886.]
Consumption.

Total
FISCAL

YEAR. Production. Importation.

production Exportation.
and
importation.

Per
Total.
capita.

Gallons.
886,1.58,265
995,498,228
1,027,304,296
1,046,245,285
1,043,682,836
1,028,179,0,57
1,025,272,187
9S3,,S48,331
1,018,9,56,524
1,033,142,4,53
1,038,822,108
1,079,742,041
1,119,393,958

[Gallons.
1,400,101
1,875,(J07
2,6U,2s3
3,143.623
3,487.044
3,037,955
2,720,951
2,298,279
2,483,198
2,5;J6,0,32
2,641,700
2,853,036
2,773,785

Gallons.
,S87,558,3(»
997,373,8:15
1,029,919,579
1,049,388,908
1,047,169,880
1,031,214,012
1,027,991,138
986,146,610
1,021,4.39,722
1,035,678,485
1,041,463,808
1,082,595,077
1,122,167,743

7,819,432
7,660,930
6,506,274
10,249,796
15,136,!)41
17,4:^5,220
17,857,892
17,96:J,5(J0
22,.586,.535
25,994,328
26,284,915
28,5:i0,.360
30.485,218

Gallons.
Gallons.
879,738,9.34
23.93
21..50
989,712,905
1,021,413,305 24.46
24.65
l,039,i:»,n2
1,0.32,032,939
24.22
23.46
1,013,778,792
1,010,133,246
23.11
968,183,050
21.90
998,853,187
22.;i5
1,009,684,157
22.45
1,015,178,893
23.19
1,054,064,717
23.78
1,091,682,525

Average for
13 years... 1,025,085,268

2,615,283

1,027,700,551

18,201,313

1,009,499,238

1872
1873
1874
1875
1876
1877-78
1878-79
1879-'80
1880-'81
1881-'82
1882-'83
1883-'84
I884-'85

Gallons.

23.19

Note.— The liter has been computed at .26417 United States gallon— little more than
one quart.

248

THE TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

It will be observed that the consumption of beer, per capita,
is less in Germany than in the United Kingdom, where it is
32.79 gallons. Keducing the 23.78 gallons of beer per
capita, consumed by the German people in the year 1884-5,
to a distilled liquor of five times its strength, we have 23.78
— 5 = 4.75 gallons + 1.19 gallons, shown as the average of
distilled liquors consumed during 11 years prior to 1882, and
we have 5.94 gallons to 3.63 gallons, the per capita consumption of our own people found by the same process.
Once more I call attention to the fact that all the evidence
goes to contradict absolutely the interested assertion of the
dealers in fermented drinks that their use tends to diminish
the consumption of alcohol. The " continent " emphatically
disproves the assertion as well as the lamentable experience of
our own country. Instead of a single lion we have now to
contend not alone with the king of beasts, but also with the
swarms of jackals who hunt out the prey and really eat up
more children than his majesty himself.
LIQUOR

CONSUMPTION

OF

THE

WORLD.

Col. Switzler gives us from official data the following, bearing upon the consumption of liquors in the four great nations
whose statistics are most available.
compakative summary of the consum.ption per capita of population ix the
United States, the United Kingdom, France and Germany of Distilled
Spirits, Wines and Malt Liquors During Each Year from 1881 to 1885^
Inclusive.
«f5
[From original official data.]

ID

I
1881
1882
1883
1884........
1854

■S .
fen

WINES.

Is

bo

a
TEARS.

SPIRITS.

'3

DISTILLED

MALT

LIQUORS.

05

-aa o

>,

a

a

S
t^

o

1 1 1

a

5
3
J

C5

(.a) Galls,
Galls. Galls. Galls. Galls. Galls.
Galls.
9.97 Galls. Galls.
.43 Galls. Galls.
1.39
33.90
.94
22.35
18.52 Galls.
1.00
.43
.48
.37
1.32
33.65
1.14
1.08
1.07
.41
27.10
.40
1.45
(a)
22.45
(«) 10.18 33.13
1.19
1.46
1.03
1.24
30.75
.38
(a)
10. C2 33.72
23.19
23.78
1.11
1.25
1.05
.39 30.67
.37
(aj
.38
1.24
(a)
-22.45
(«)
10.44
1.01
(a)
1..33
1.14
1.24
36.88
(a)
11.18 32.79

(«)

a No date.
Note — The years referred to are, for France and Great Britain calendar years ; for
the United States the five years ending June 30, 1886 ; for Germany in the case of beer,
the five years ending March 31, 1885, and in the case of spirits tlie five years ending
^13
March 31, 1881, these being the latest years for w^hich data were obtainable.

SCANDINAVIA

WINE
AvEEAGE

Production

RUSSIA

PRODUCTION

—

PERSIA.

OF THE

WORLD.

of Wine in the Principal Wine-Growing
THE World.

249

Countries

of

[Estimated by M. Tisserand in 1884, London,
taken from
1885.]" Journal of the Statistical Society,"
Production.

Countries.

jtaly

Switzerland

..

Countries.

Imperial gallons.
765,075,973
United States
22,000,000
605,000,000
Turkey
Cape of Good Hope
484,000,000
187,000,000
88,000,000
81,200,000
77,000,000
Total
35,200,000
28,000,000

Production.
Imperial
gallons.
28,600,000
18,0110,000
22,000,000,
15,400,000
15,400,000
11,000,000
1,933,800
2,485,599.772

Prof. Thausing, cited in the Western Brewer for October,
1880, makes the entire beer production of the European countries and the United States for the year 1879, 2,660,000,000
imperial gallons, supplying a population of 320,000,000. It
is well known that the consumption of liquors is very great
in the Scandinavian countries. At one time in Sweden it was
30,000,000 gallons of ardent spirits annually, or more than
ten gallons for each inhabitant. The tax on brandy is the
most important item of Russian revenue, and the people are
encouraged to consume it in order that the government may
get the tax. The result may be imagined. Here is the
most numerous if not the most powerful nation in Europe,
with 80,000,000 of people. In 1847, the revenues were
$100,000,000 in round numbers, of which $40,000,000 were
derived from brandy. William Hewett is authority for this,
and observes that " the temperance societies have never been
able to take root in Russia."
In December, 1882, a correspondont of the London Times
wrote that " the vice of intemperance is growing so fast as to
occasion grave anxiety among public men of all classes. . . .
"The evil affects all classes and is even rife among the other
sex."
Speaking of wine drinking in Persia, Rev. I. S. Cochran,
long a resident missionary in that country, says : " In the winemaking season the whole village of male adults will be habitually intoxicated for a month or six weeks
Wine
drinking is the greatest bane and curse of the people of the

250

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

wine-making districts." Mr. Labaree, also a missionary in
Persia, writes : " If I had any sentiments favorable to the use
of wine when I left America, my observations during the
seven years I have resided in this paradise of vineyards have
convinced me that the principle of total abstinence is the only
safeguard against the great social and religious evils that flow
from the practice of wine drinking
There is scarcely
a community to be found where the blighting influences of
intemperance are not seen in families distressed and ruined,
property squandered, character destroyed, and lives lost."
COST

OF

THE

LIQUOR

TRAFFIC

OF

THE

WORLD.

The United Kingdom, France, Germany and the United
States have a population in round numbers of 175,000,000
souls. The remainder of Europe has a population of
190,000,000 — all of them large consumers of alcoholic drinks.
Asia has a population of 800,000,000, and intemperance in
the use of various alcoholic intoxicants prevails among these
nations to some extent ; but fortunately the heathen are not
yet as badly drunken as their more " civilized " fellow beings.
Africa has 200,000,000, and we shall see elsewhere something
of the ravages of intemperance and the crimes of civilization being perpetrated there. Then there are Canada, Mexico,
and the Central and South American States, Australia and
the isles of the sea, and everywhere alcohol is at work. It is
impossible to obtain definite statistics of the whole world, but
it is obviously below the truth to double the consumption of
these 175,000,000 living in the British Isles, France, Germany,
and our own country (less than one eighth), in order to find
that of the whole 1,500,000,000 of the race.
A careful estimate and calculation based upon that assumption has been made by Eev. T. F. Parker, indorsed by Dr.
Richard Eddy and incorporated by him in his "Alcohol in
History," already referred to, which was again substantially
indorsed by A. M. Powell, Esq., Rev. Dr. Miner and Hon.
James Black, who, after much care in reading and examination, gave their unanimous and favorable judgment upon the
work of Dr. Eddy. I feel great confidence in its being a
statement below and not in exaggeration of the truth. In
fact it should be increased by at least one half.

Mrs. Armenia S. White.

COST

OF

LIQUORS

IN

THE

WORLD,

251

The exact cost of intoxicating drinks in the United States and
in other parts of the world through a series of years, it is not
possible to arrive at, but an approximation can be made. Rev. T.
F. Parker has carefully compiled statistics from the best authorities, and presents these results, which are as nearly correct as figures
setting forth this matter can be :
LIQUORS

CONSUMED

IN

THE

Spirituous liquors
Beer
Imported wines

UNITED

STATES.

69,572,062 gallons annually.
279,746,044
"
"
10,700,000
"
"

LIQUORS

CONSUMED

IN

GREAT

Spirituous liquors
Beer and ale
Foreign and British wines
LIQUORS

BRrTAIN.

33,090,377 gallons annually.
906,340,399
"
"
17,144,539
"
"
CONSUMED

IN

Beer
Wine

GERMANT.

146,000,000 gallons annually.
121,000,000
"
^'
LIQUORS

CONSUMED

IN

FRANCE.

Spirituous liquors
27,000,000 gallons annually.
Beer
51,800.000
"
"
Wine
600,000,000
"
''
We estimate that the world consumes twice as much as these
four nations :
Spirituous liquors,
Beer,
Wine,

314,031,882 gallons annually.
2,797,291,632
"
"
1,482,239,914
"
"

Cost of liquors in the world in ten years, $64,405,042,234,
or twice the value of the United States of America. Allowing the
average value of the world per square mile, to equal the United
States, and every one hundred and twenty years the actual cash
value of the world is consumed in these drinks. The materials
used in the manufacture are annually as follows :
Bushels of
Bushels of
Gi'ain.
Grapes.

Value.

United States,

39,349,520

2,364,312 $ 42,895,984

Great Britain and Ii-eland,
Germany

63,929,550
9,125,000

3,784,246
34,714,285

69,605,920
61,196,428

Fi-ance,
The World,

9,237,500 171,428,571
242,971,145 432,641,261

366,380,357
891,922,536

252

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

The cost in France and Germany would be modified by the cost
of grapes which are much cheaper there.
The land, buildings, machinery, labor, etc., invested in the
traflSc is about as follows :
Acres.

Building and
Machinery.

Labor.

United States,
903,414 S 74,041,044 ^ 9,405,104
Great Britain and Ireland, 1,629,773 92,116,883 15,271,432
Germany,
517,410 46,120,535 6,304,892
Fi-ance,
The World,

1,576,017
9,253,228

190,967,633 27,929,283
746,488,070 117,821,020
Value of Land.

United States,
Great Britain and Ireland,
Germany,
France,
The World,
COST

OF

ALCOHOLIC

DRINKS

Total Investment.

S 45,170,500 $ 128,616,848
81,487,650
188,876,965
25,870,000
78,395,427
78,800,850
297,697,766
462,660,400 1,326,964,492
IN

THE

UNITED

STATES

Direct outlay for drinks,
Seven per cent, on the $10,000,000,000 which the
nation should possess, but has been destroyed bythe traffic
Direct loss of wages,
Ten per cent, on capital employed in the manufacture,
Ten per cent, on capital employed in saloons,. . .
Charity bestowed on the poor,
..
Loss by sea and land,
Court, police, hospital expenses, charity, litigation, insurance,
Total,

ANNUALLY.

$726,407,028

700,000,000
7,903,844
25,848,081
36,254,700
14,000,000
50,000,000
207,266,550
$1,866,642,203

" In return for this," says Mr. Parker, " the nation receives 500
murders, 500 suicides, 100,000 criminals, 200,000 paupers, 60,000
deaths from drunkenness, 600,000 besotted drunkards, 600,000
moderate drinkers, who will be sots ten years hence, 500,000
homes destroyed, 1,000,000 children worse than orphaned. And
if the country should be searched from center to circumference, it
would be impossible to find any good resulting from the traffic, or
a single reason why it should exist longer."

PER

CAPITA

CONSUMPTION

OP

ALCOHOL.

253

We have seen that a reasonable estimate of the yearly per
capita consumption of absolute alcohol is in
Gallons.
United States
.
.
United Kingdom
.
France, 6.2, not including
including them the same
Germany
.
.
.
Total

.

.

.

. ^
.
malt
.
.

.
.
.3.43
•
.
.7.80
liquors, but
.
.
.7.80
.
.
.5.94

.

.

.

. 24.97

which, divided by four, gives 6.16 gallons as the average
throughout these four countries containing 175,000,000 of
people — theaggregate is 1,078,000,000 gallons, which is nearly
correct, as a careful calculation based upon the actual population of each country will show, although the rule adopted may
not be absolutely correct. Doul)le this for the whole world,
2,156,000,000 gallons. I cannot see how the consumption
by the whole fifteen hundred millions can be less than three
times as much as that of tire 175.000,000, or 3,234,000,000
gallons of pure alcohol. If we should assume the average
proportion of alcohol in the various forms of distilled liquors,
brandies, whiskies, rums and gins, and of fermented liquors,
ales, beers, wines and highly fortified adulterations, and the
various mongrel intoxicants which are drank and paid for, at
twenty-five per cent, of the entire bulk which is paid for by
the consumer, we then have a qiiantitij for the world, consumed by it annually, of 12,936,000,000 gallons, sold at
retail to the consumer. It Avill be difficult to conceive that
there will be less than ten drinks, costing five cents each, to
the gallon, of this average compound made up of the admixture of all the various alcoholic intoxicants of the world consumed yearly.
We have then 129,360,000,000 (one hundred and twentynine billion three hundred and sixty million) separate and
distinct drinks costing at five cents $6,468,000,000 (six billion
four hundred and sixty-eight million dollars), the direct cost
of intoxicating beverages yearly to the world. Double this,
so as to include the indirect cost and losses, and we have as
the cash cost of these beverages yearly $12,936,000,000
(twelve billion, nine hundred and thirty-six million of dol-

254

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

lars). I am "fanatic' enough to believe that the actual
consumption and cost directly and indirectly to the world
are more rather than less than these estimates.
We should remember that at least ten billions of this consumption and burden fall upon the four hundred millions of
the civilized inhabitants of Europe and America — that as
among them, the selected victims, in and through whom the
most of the terrible devastation is wrought, do not exceed one
fourth, or one hundred millions. Other hundreds of millions
are on the road, but these I now refer to are on the home
stretch and will be in at the finish.
Here I drop this subject. Let reason and imagination
work.

CHAPTER
ALCOHOL

4GAINST

THE

XIII.

NATIVE
RACES
OCEANICA.

OF

ASIA,

AFRICA

AND

The Trade with Africa, Asia and the Islands of the Sea — How it has Followed the March of Discovery — The Situation in the Valley of the
Congo — The Vice of Intemperance almost Unknown where the Mohammedan Religion Prevails — Advent of the European Slave and Gin
Trade — Testimony of the Missionaines — Government Influences at Work
in Southern Africa — A Heathen Gough — How a Heathen Tribe Vigorously Suppressed the Habit and the Trade — Oceanica.

THE alcoholic evil of the world is a unit, and no general
plan of action which does not contemplate its complete
extirpation is worth consideration. As each individual's first
duty is to rid himself of it, and his second to aid others, so
each nation should destroy the evil first in its own special
jurisdiction. But alcoholism is international in its extent, and
our influence and responsibility are co-existent with our race
relations, and the work should go on contemporaneously everywhere. Alcohol has a special afiinity for the brain, and its
ravages upon the mental and moral powers are in proportion
to their development.
Thus in the very nature of things alcohol is the great foe of
civilised men. Europeans and Americans are its victims more
than other people, because these advanced nations have more
brain and nerve upon which the poison works. If savage and
barbarous people possessed the power of self-control which
belong to civilized men, they would reject the drink evil with
comparative ease when they discovered its destructive influence. But the savage is weak to resist his appetite and
passions ; he yields to a temptation of far less actual power
than is required to overcome the self-control resulting from
that increase of moral and intellectual force which constitutes
the very process of civilization. Whether the brain be the
mind or only its organ — whether the material or spiritual
theory of our highest nature be the correct one — all concede
255

256

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

that the brain is the point in our organization where the connection ismade between soul and body ; and that, so far as
our earthly existence is concerned, whatever seizes upon the
brain and the nervous forces controls the human being.
Hence the civilized man, if he be addicted to the use of
liquor, and makes no effort to escape from its influence, is
naturally the worst drunkard of the race. I do not know that
the theory is correct. It is at all events the most consoling
explanation which occurs to me of the apparent fact that
civilized nations are the drunken nations, and that they universally spread the evil to others.
When these stronger peoples set about their own reformation
they have the inherent power to accomplish it. What they
often do as individuals they can do if they please as nations ;
but the savage has no such innate reformatory forces, and so
long as it is possible he gratifies his appetite until he disappears.
Thus of the three hundred thousand natives who inhabited
the Sandwich Islands when they were discovered, civilization
has destro3''ed all but forty thousand, a deteriorated remnant
which even the redemptory influences of Christianity have
hardly saved. British rum has not reduced, but has actually
obliterated, the Hottentot, and there is nothing left of him but
his picture in the primary geography, which people now
elderly studied when at school.
The relation of the more civilized races to weaker nations
in the spread of the alcoholic evil is the most important aspect
of the whole problem. There has never been a race of men
which has not demonstrated its power to rise to a higher and
happier level if it had the opportunity. The principles of the
Christian religion never yet failed to convert an ordinary man
into a better one when they have had a fair chance to produce their natural effect. In thousands and millions of
instances the weak have been developed into giants of moral
power ; the most vicious and criminal into models of loveliness and holy life. This force which we call the Christian
religion has unquestionably power to redeem and save to the
uttermost — if it be given the opportunity. Its apostles and
witnesses have ennobled human nature in every kindred and
tongue under the whole heaven, and the blood of martyrs has

rNTTiUENCE

OF

ALCOHOL

ON

HEATHEN

NATIONS.

257

•everywhere attested the sincerity of their professions, and their
sublime devotion to the heavenly truth by which they were
insph'ed. There is a force in the world which would save the
world.
But what is the process now in plain operation before our
eyes ? We find a population living upon our planet of fifteen
hundred millions of human beings. Europe has three hundred
millions, America one hundred millions, Asia eight hundred,
and Africa two hundred millions, and one hundred millions
more are inhabitants of the isles of the sea. Of this vast number
of souls about four hundred millions may be classed as civilized people, among whom the Christian religion is nominally
prevailing and controlling individuals and institutions, but
really with only feeble application of its peculiarly unselfish
principles in personal and national life. The remaining eleven
hundred millions are many of them embraced in the provinces,
colonies and dependencies of the Christian powers, and all are
really subject to that supremacy which results from the spirit
of political and commercial aggi'andizement. Everywhere the
heathen nations and barbarous tribes are giving way before
the demands of the western powers, which, with gunpowder
and opium and rum, proceed at once to "develop" their
destruction. The costs of war are largely dispensed with
because unnecessary ; for commerce has discovered a way to
convert the work of destruction into a protitaljle pecuniary
speculation, in which the dealer makes his fortune and the government its revenue, and both blasphemously avail themselves
of the self-sacrificing labors and the pious reputation of the
ministers of our sacred religion to recommend the murderous
commodity to the confidence of unsuspecting peoples, until
the use has developed the appetite, after which there is no
longer occasion for hypocrisy on the part of alleged Christianity turned Eumseller.
The process by which "Christian" nations are to-da}' killing
off the remainder of the human race is a demonstration that
there are no Christian nations.
Measured by what they do to others. Christian nations are
the vilest criminals, the very murderers of mankind.
Instead
of civilizing and elevating the heathen we destroy them.
It
may be that this is the " order of Providence " ; at all events
17

258

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

they disappear. By a combined process of rum-selling and
psalm-singing we " improve " these weaker brethren from the
face of the earth — we promote their emigration out of it. And
now we are well on our way in this great crime of assassinating the race by poison administered in the robes of Christianity at the victim's expense of body, soul and estate.
This thing will be set right sometime as surely as there is
a God. Take for example the people of India. There are
two hundred and fifty millions of them. With more or less
of success, missionaries of both Catholic and Protestant Christianity have long been teaching a holy religion and the advantages of a higher life to the people of India. During many
years France and England contended for the political mastery,,
but for a century past Hindostan has been a British province
and her accumulated wealth has been worked like one vast
mine for gold. Many blessings have been conferred upon
India by English statesmanship, and especially by the upright
administration of private law.
But in these latter days the traffic in alcohol and in vile
combinations, of which it is a part, has increased, and is
increasinar to such extent as to threaten the extinction of one
sixth of the population of the globe within a few generations,,
unless its ravages be arrested. Such an assertion seems to
be madness — but what are the facts ? Here are all these multitudes— perhaps eighty millions of them Mohammedans ; the
rest Buddhists, and all forbidden the use of intoxicating beverages by their religion. Whatever else maybe said of their
former condition or of their present inclination, until forced
or tempted by their conquerors and the greed of a criminal
commerce, they were a sober people. Whatever of evil there
may have been inflicted upon them by their superstitions and
by war, the}^ were at least free, comparatively, from the worse
horrors of general intoxication.
Professor Parkes states :
A great evil is growing up in India which now could be checked,
but which we shall be powerless to meet in a few years. The
Hindoos, formerly the most temperate of races, are rapidly becoming addicted to drinli. This is said to be partly owing to the regulations of government permitting, and even encouraging, the sale of
spirits, although alcoholic liquors form no part of the ordinary

;:>■-•

Mrs. Hannah
AmeriiLin Secretary,

IVhitall Smith,
Worhr s Jl'. C. T. U.

DEIXKIXG

HABITS

OF

XATIVES

OF

INDIA.

259

food of the people and therefore their prohibition is not difficult ;
and partly from the bad example of the Europeans in India, who,
as the dominant race, are impressing more and more the nations
which the}' control. It seems a matter which our statesmen maywell look into, for it involves the happiness of many nations.
One would certainly think that in his last observation the
Professor is right.
The Rev. J. Gilson Gregson, long an English missionary
in India, whose writings upon the subject are of unquestioned authority in treating? of the " Drinkins: habits amonsf
the natives of India " in a formal paper prepared for the
British and Colonial Temperance Congress held in London ia
the month of July, 1886, says :
Thus we have reliable evidence to prove that drinking is rapidly
becoming a national custom amongst a people who were abstainers by personal habits and religious principles until we corrupted
them with our Anglican intoxicants and social usages ; unless some
effort is made for the prohibition of the manufacture of drink and
its exportation from England, the demoralizing influence of drinking customs will be a curse to the empire more destructive in its
consequences than the heathen customs of their forefathers. . . .
In estimating the consequences of drinking customs imported
into the country by Europeans, and forced upon them for the
requirements of social intercourse and exacting revenues, we
believe them to be crimes of equal magnitude with those caused by
sutteeism, infanticide and fanaticism, and therefore require the
same prohibitory legislation to remove the curse of drink which is
settling upon the empire like a black thunder cloud, dooming and
destro^'ing its inhabitants witli relentless cruelty and without
mercy either to rich or poor, educated or uneducated, Hindoo,
Mohammedan or European. The ravages of the di'ink fiend are to
be found among all classes without any regard to position or
respect of persons.
Keshub Chunder Sen, " the eminent leader of educated
natives," as^ain and a^ain has denounced the terrible evils of
drink, says thej^ are increasing year by year, whole families
having been swept away by it. He plaintively remarked to
the missionary, "M}^ countrymen have not the same constitution as yours and therefore die sooner when they take to
drink."
Mr. Gregson says that to such au extent has drunkenness

260

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

'

prevailed among the native Christian community, induced by
their contact with the Europeans, that the heathen regard the
use of intoxicating liquor as a sign of a Christian, and believe
that " eating pork and drinking liquor form the principal
features of native Christian life. . , . . . The condition of
educated gentlemen is becoming more and more deplorable."
A leader of native thought writes as follows : " The educated
classes betake themselves chiefly to imported liquors. We
consider the government to be entirely responsible for this
state of things." Mr. Gregson quotes as follows from another
authority • " The statistics of native gentlemen who drink
are simply terrible. I asked a first rate native doctor some
time ago what he thought was the proportion of men who
drank among the educated classes and he at once said about
90 per cent
and native doctors have told me that
deaths from delirium tremens are very common
and we have reason to believe that drink is being introduced
into the zenana, for the women to indulge in the liquor their
husbands are so exceedingly fond of."
The Bengal Commission lately reported that the revenue
from native liquor has increased 23,000,000 of rupees within
six years. According to the present system of taxation nearly
every village has a liquor shop, known among the simpleminded natives as the government liquor shop, and they consider that they are conferring a favor upon the government
by purchasing this taxed liquor. There are those in America
who take the same view of the subject at home.
Mr. Gregson states his opinion to be that " so long as
liquor is regarded as a legitimate source of revenue, it is impossible to prevent the spread of drunkenness throughout the
length and breadth of the Empire," and that it is sad beyond
expression that the " civilizing and educational, and even
religious, surroundings, of educated natives have been ruined
and corrupted b}^ the drinking habits of their teachers."
Mr. Stephen H. Kearsey, of Mankapar Gouda, Oudh, in a
very carefully prepared paper, confirms the general statements
above cited in regard to India and Burmah. He says, speaking of the Burmese, that the religion is Buddhism, one of the
five commandments being, " Thou shalt not drink nor touch
any strong drink," that the British occupation of lower

SOME

OF

THE

VICES

WHICH

FOLLOW

COLONIZATION^.

261

Burmah carried with it many blessings, but that there is a sad
reverse to the picture, that in the wake of the British came the
grog shop, opium dens and prostitution. "We have now
annexed upper Burmah, and a friend writing to the press from
Bliamo states that it is now a fearful place for cheap drink
and heavy crime. A liquor manufactured from rice lime," he
says, "will dissolve a Martini bullet in thirty minutes and
burns the inside of those who drink it." But it seems that the
natives reduce this before drinking it ; " they invarial)l3^ make
a tablespoonful go as far as European drinkers do a quart."
The writer does not state which kills furthest, the liquor or the
bullet, but the liquor must be the surer death, for it goes
straight to the citadel of life.
A native of Calcutta says : "The vice of drunkenness has
been making very considerable progress within the last fivcand-twenty years. Among my office mates of those days
(a quarter of a centur}' since), only about ten per cent, di'ank
at all, and only two were drunkards. A similar reckoning now
would give fifty per cent, of drinkers and at least eight or ten
per cent, of drunkards." He adds that the doctors are among
those who help to spread the vice. A resident English merchant gives similar testimony in regard to the important and
populous island of Ceylon.
Surgeon-major R. Pringle, M. D., of Her Majesty's Bengal
army, who has had thirty years experience in India, furnished
an invaluable paper to the Congress. He notes an improvement in the drinking habits of Europeans within the la.st thirty
3^ears, but grieves "to say a very different account must l)e
given of the effects of western civilization and rule on the
drinking habits of the natives of India. With the exception
of the Presidency towns and among the camp followers attached
to or resident in the old military cantonments, drinking habits
among the natives were practically unknown. The Mohammedan shunned spirits as shrdh (shame water) , and the respectable or high-cast Hindu as to him the mark of degradation ;
now, alas, all is changed ;
as regards the
lower and laboring classes among the natives of India, there
is serious reason to believe that intemperance is making fearful strides, or rather bounds, among them. If we take the
instance of Assam, in ten years the receipts from excise duty

262

THE

TEMPEEAlSrCE

MOVEMENT.

in this province have risen from $37,675 to $114,145. Now
there can be little doubt that these recipts are derived from
liquor drunk by the Coolies on the tea estates. I have known
the northwest provinces for three years longer than the period
given in the table under notice, and can speak from a personal
knowledge of one third of the population of those provinces,
and I can unhesitatingly state that this liquor revenue for all
practical purposes is gathered from the poorest of the poor ;
that it is gathered in a way which is a disgrace to a country
guided in its actions by the Christian religion ; that the good
done by, and in the name of, the Empress of India is worse
than undone by the measures adopted to raise the revenue ;
that to spread the blessings of hospitals, dispensaries and
vaccination over the country is little better than a mockery in
the face of this demoralizing traffic
I can speak for
10,000,000 in the northwest provinces when I state that if
local self-government were granted not a grog shop would
remain in twelve months ; the Mohammedans would not soil
their fingers with rupees gathered by " shame water" ; and the
Hindu would gladly avail himself of the opportunity of showing his contempt for and disgust with the co-religionist whose
thirst for silver was so great that he bought at auction the
privilege to sell the government "shame water." "Twenty
years personal observation of the Dedhra Dhoon in the northwestern provinces has demonstrated to me the appalling fact
that the entire race of hereditary owners of the soil have all
been swept off by drink."
What must be thought of a government which makes it and
forces it upon these hundreds of millions who are total abstainers bynatural inclination and by the precepts of their
ancient faith ! Here is religious lil)erty with a vengeance !
The revenue from liquor is raised by what is called the outstill system — stills that are outside of government control.
Any man who buys the excise contract of a province can
open stills all over it, and so instead of one central still you
have them everywhere. The privilege is often turned into
joint stock companies. Every shareholder is constituted a
brewer or maker, and the consequence is that he pushes the
trade in every way so that the dividend may be larger. By
the out-still system these contracts have become exceedingh^

INDIA A GAEDEN

OF DEATH.

263

valuable
''I very much
prefer that government
should control one central vStill rather than spread out stills
right through the province." This explanation of the " system "
is by Mr. Gregson.
The evidence is overwhelming and uncontradicted that India
is being rapidly converted into a garden of death, where
alcohol more than fills the place of pestilence, famine and
sword. These are facts recently coming to the attention of
the English people, and it cannot be that this brave and
aggressive people, although they may continue to poison themselves, as we do in America also, will continue the tacit and
cowardly assassination of the unwilling millions in their grasp.
Still there is the precedent of opium forced upon the Chinese.
There was in attendance upon the session of the Temperance Congress in London, 1886, Mr. Nanda Lai Ghosh, a
native of India and barrister-at-law, who, as one of the few of
his countrymen who " have been privileged to receive an
English education," requested to be allowed to say that he
had been an abstainer up to date and hoped to remain so to
the last. He then proceeded: "I agree with the papers"
(those presented to the Congress) "as regards the natives of
all classes of Indians and the drink traffic. The temperance
question is not only a question of morality, but also an economical question. About 40,000,000 of people in India do not
have enough food from year's end to year's end, and when
this poison of drink is spread among them what will be the
economical condition of India? We have statistics and we
know well that the people are in abject poverty, and yet there
comes the demon of drink to intensify their misery — introduced
by a Christian government.
I appeal to a'ou to
abolish the poison of drink."
But I have not space to more than note the introduction
and rapid increase of the traffic with China, already so afflicted
by the opium habit forced upon her b}' the imperious demands
of a Christian commerce. Says an observer cited by Eev.
Canon Ellison, M. A., Chairman of the Church of England
Temperance Society, in an address read at the Oxford Diocesan
Temperance Anniversary, Oct. 25, 1886 : "In China thirteen
years ago you could hardly see a drunken man anywhere,
more especially in Shanghai ; but that now if you go down

264

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

the principal streets you will see hundreds of Chinamen intoxicated, not with native drinks, but with those imported
from this country " (England) .
I take the following from the Missionary Herald of January, 1884, kindly furnished me with other valuable matter by
Dr. Clark, Corresponding Secretary of the A. B. C. F. M. :
The pastor of a Methodist church in the north of Japan has
contributed to the Christian Weekly, of Tokio, a notable article on
sake drinking. Besides ably discussing the question iu the sanitary
and religious aspects, he gives some very striking and interesting
facts.
It seems that the Chinese Emperor Buo, three thousand 3'ears
ago, was a radical temperance reformer. His laws on the subject
were very strict, and their violation was punished by death. This
system, somewhat modified, was afterwards introduced into Japan,
where it remained in force nearly a thousand years. But its influence has long since been lost. To-day intemperance is one of the
growing and desperate evils of Japan. The Japanese spend yearly
80,000,000 yen, or more than 60,000,000 dollars for sake, in the
manufacture of which 26,000,000 bushels of rice are consumed, or
almost one fifth of the total yield of the country, leaving a short
allowance for food, and none for export. This one drink costs the
people as much as does their entire government. The temperance
question is, then, for Japan, as for many another more Christian laud,
a very serious and pressing one, which we hope the present large
outpouring of the Spirit will do much to solve.
Everything indicates that the control of Asia will be divided
between European powers and that the far larger portion of
the people of that great continent will receive their destiny from
England and Russia. By both political and commercial power
England has given direction already to the fate of India and
has practically injected the blood of China with opium and
rum. Russia, "where temperance societies never have taken
root," and where the policy of the government is to encourage
the consumption of strong drink for the sake of revenue — so
that the people die of drink and patriotism — is spreading the
wings of her power over nearly the whole width of the continent in her tireless flight to the Oriental seas — and with her
go the drinking habits of her people and her system of taxation for revenue. Wherever France, Germany, Holland,
Portugal and Spain hold possession, the Demon of Drink

THE

DAEK

CONTINENT .

265'

holds joint occupation witli them, and thus it is that Asia and
her eight hundred millions are threatened by this Christian
curse.
AFRICxV AND THE

CONGO

FREE

STATE.

Africa is the home of two hundred millions of the race
whose hopeless fate has been the theme of lament and commiseration for ages. But notwithstanding internal w^ars and
the horrors of the slave trade, which have prevailed there
from the earliest times, numerous and powerful nations have
developed wathin her unknown recesses, and have attained to
such enjoyment of life as is possible in a land of unsurpassed
fertility, immense and spontaneous production, and high
forms of barbaric art. Although there have been attempts
at settlement along her Avhole w^estcrn, southern and eastern
c6asts, ever since the discovery of the route to India by way
of the Cape of Good Hope, and something of legitimate commerce, as well as the sordid atrocities of the traffic in slaves,
was established with the interior regions, still the European
had never penetrated the mysteries of the dark continent
until Livingstone and Stanley, and other great discoverers
associated with them, revciiled the route and sources of the
Congo, and laid bare the secrets of the Xile. Suddenly a new
vrorld with its tremendous possibilities rose upon the vision
of commercial nations, and aroused the anxiety of the philanthropist at the same time that it excited both enterprise and
cupidity to the highest exertions.
The Congo valle}^ contains 900,000 square miles and
50,000,000 of people ; or one third as much territory as that
of the United States, which is capable of improvement, with
the same population of our own country according to the
census of 1S80. By some, however, the population is fixed
at 40,000,000. It is at once apparent that no such density of
population is consistent with the idea of the savage state.
There must be a very considerable advance in the arts of life
or no such population could exist even in this region of tropical abundance. The Congo is navigable for 1000 miles in
the verv center of Africa. The o;reat stream is like the aorta to
the heart, and in coming centuries should bear on its majestic
bosom the interchange of all nations with at least two hundred
millions of civilized and enlio-htened descendants from the

266

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

vio'orous barl)arians who now inhabit its basin and the re2;ions
drained by its tributaries. Anticipating what must yet be,
the nations of Europe and the United States recognized the
" International African Trading Association " as the " Free
Congo State," guaranteeing its existence with a national flag,
and power to make treaties with the various tribes of whom
titles could be acquired to lands and other property and the
permanent freedom of commerce in and along the river .secured.
The motives actuating the thirteen powers which gave international recognition of the Free State of the Congo were, on
paper at least, highly honorable to them all, and in their
action the United States bore a conspicuous part. We must
therefore assume a corresponding responsibility in securing
the ends proposed by the Congress at Berlin.
The Mohammedan religion prevails in the north of Africa,
including Egypt, and wherever that religion flourishes, unless
its precepts are set aside by other and more powerful influences, the vice of intemperance is almost unknown. But in
the rest of the continent this vice has flourished with little
restraint. The African has always provided for himself some
juice or acid with wdiichto become intoxicated, and thus kindle
his rage for war or enliven his daily dance and the songs of
his musical nature.
But until the advent of the European slave trader and gin
trader, no increase of the drinking habit is supposed to have
taken place for ages. These heathen have seemed to be free
from the intensity of appetite which is developed by the
strong drinks of civilization.
The exigencies of these two "trades ," (in slaves and gin),
which should never be sanctified with any such designation —
they are simply infinite crimes of which the former in its effects
is far the more innocent of the two — have led to the introduction ofthe alcohol of civilization, which destroys like the
pestilence of the Middle Ages, where the drink of the native
was comparatively harmless.
Horace Waller, F. R. G. S., has prepared a pamphlet which
embodies the information collected by delegates appointed by
the various Missionary societies working in Africa to consider
the question of the liquor traffic in that continent, which was
published the present year.
From this pamphlet many im-

STARTLIXG

STATISTICS.

267

portant facts in this chapter are derived.
Referring to the
early period of the slave trade, Mr. Waller says :
So far lie (the African) was, perhaps, neither better nor worse
bv flux of time when the Bristol merchant found him out and when
plantations yearned for his presence. Here then we come to the
indictment against the white merchant which extends back over
many generations. He is accused of having found the African
very much given to carouse and drink, and he has engrafted upon
this desire an intensified one whicli will be satisfied with nothingshort of gin and rum. " If Pombi " has slain its thousands, alcohol has, in its turn, destroyed its millions, and every drop of it has
been taken by the triljes
For hundreds of miles in the interior
tlie square-shouldered bottles are as well known as the beads and
brass wire which are the usual currency,
and along their path
sorrow follows
The drinking idea is inseparable from the
notion of European life ....
whatever milk of human kindness the
traders may have possessed at one time seems to have passed into
a milk punch stage
The degradation of the wretched tribes
of West Africa has reached a depth which is appalling.
Mr. Waller then gives a statement showing the quantities
and values of spirits of all kinds exported from the following
countries during recent years. Other shipments probably
were made from Germany, but no reliable statistics could be
obtained.
Gallons.

Great Britain sent in
Germanv
'' '•
Portugal
" '^
America
'• '•

Value.

1884
002,328 £117,143
1884
7,13G,2G3 713,634
1882
91.524
6,166
1884-5
921,412
56,889
8,751,527

£893,832

All accounts ao:ree that the trade has immensely increased
since these years. It Vv^ill be observed that the export of each
nation is given but for a single year, and that by adulterations
and cheating in various ways for this amount of alcohol great
values of native commodities will be received in exchange.
Mr. James Irvine, of Liverpool, who is vouched for b}^ Mr.
Waller as specially fitted to testify, says :
The extent of the trade is so prodigious that I think the following estimate of the quantity annually poured into " the rivers" or
the delta of the Niger is sufficiently eloquent and relieves me from
the necessity of further remark regarding the evil. Such a flood of

268

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

rum cannot be consumed without causing an awful amount of
demoralization. It is not possible to get at actual shipments,
but I am sure I do not over estimate the quantity when I put down
sixty thousand hogsheads of fifty gallons each (three million gallons)
as the annual consumption in the rivers of Niger, Benin, Brass, New
(Calabar, Bonny, Opobo, Old Calabar, Cameroons, etc. In other
words, this compressed space lying between four degrees and eight
minutes east longitude, or say two hundred and fifty miles of
coast, consumes twenty thousand tons, or say twenty ships full, of
one thousand tons each, every year. The amazing thing is that all
this traffic is conducted in the main by not over a dozen firms, the
members of which are most excellent men, many of them, I believe,
sincere Christians.
That is the trouble about this whole business. If " excellent men" and " sincere Christians " would let it alone, the
devil would be beaten out of it by his own sense of shame
and disgrace. But as long as he can conceal his tail and sit
at the communion table, why shouldn't these poor wretches
in Africa and America continue to be turned into hell?
Flowers from Eden to garland the neck of the Snake I
Mr. Irvine proceeds : " Convince them they are wrong and
induce them to withdraw, and what is accomplished? Simply
worse men take their place." Doubted — denied — there are
no worse men than Christians who sell rum. But not to
interrupt Mr. Irvine again. " When for fifteen years I conducted my business without it, I was constantly asked what
was accomplished, and told that, if I continued to decline, as
much rum as ever would go in. I felt between me and Africa
that was true, but between me and my conscience it was
another matter, and ultimately I withdrew, as success was
impossible without it. Notwithstanding I cordially join with
you in believing that no eifort should be spared to stop or
reduce the evil — it is the Lord's work and he can succeed in
ways unthought of by us at present."
Now I am going to stop the book right here to say a word for
Mr. James Irvine of Liverpool — the man who gave up his profitable business because he had a conscience. Such men save
nations as Lot saved Sodom. If in England and America there
were ten such men, they might save the world. The liquor trade
is full of the other kind of excellent men and Christians. They

Mary Allen

West,

Ediior of " The Union Signair

GESr VEESUS

BnSSION ARIES.

269

are not all hypocrites. Many of them suffer untold pangs of
conscience as they ply their deadly vocation for sustenance
and accumulation. Circumstances have made them the managers of these social, state, national and international crimes,
but society — that is you and I, and they and all of us — which
has the power to destroy, is responsible for the wickedness
of its agents, and what the state permits, it does.
Mr. AValler further observes that we cannot get at the full
extent of the disease ;
we are in the dark as to the
extent of the evil with which France is mixed up, and her
trade and energy is just now conspicuous on the African seaboard. Neither can we go into the quality of the stuff dealt
out to the native tribes. In some mstances, spirit of great
strength, which is diluted many times before even the throat of
a Brass Kiver negro can tolerate it, is used, and this traffic is
also forcing its way into east Africa. In 1883, Archdeacon
Hamilton wrote from Brass River that one of the National
African Co.'s steamers recently carried 25,000 cases of gin
and demijohns of rum, and this was a supply for two factories
only, and observing its effects upon the people of the town
of Bonny, March 5, 1885, he thus concludes his narrative:
"It appears to be the common practice to drink gin in the morning and tumbo (palm wine) in the evening, so that there are
other evils to contend with beside heathenism and cannibalism.
Rev. Hugh Goldie, missionary at Old Calabar nearly forty
years, in the United Presbyterian Magazine — I condense all
that I can — says :
" Thus brutalized by the slave
trade they give themselves to the indulgence of their lusts
and appetites to the utmost extent of their means."
He speaks of " the utter degradation into which that traffic
sunk them by the fire water found among them,
which
neutralizes the efforts of the church more than the heathenism
of the country
the people are generally in a state of
semi-intoxication, disinclined to listen, caring for nothing but
strong drink. As far into the interior as we have penetrated
the gin bottle had preceded us. Even commercial benefits
are lost by the destruction of the very people with whom the
commerce is attempted." He expresses great regret that the
Berlin conference on the formation of the " Free Congo State "
did not exclude the drink traffic.
A great part of the fire

270

THE

TEMPEEANCE

MOVEMENT.

water is from Germany — indeed that empire seems to be
utterly reckless in its greed for commercial returns. A Glasgow firm formerly employed a large number of looms weaving cloth for the African market — now they have not one. A
trader wrote from Calabar river to his principals to send no
more cloth — drink was the article in demand, and Mr. Joseph
Thompson, F. R. G. S., says that the drink traffic will render
the anticipated demand for calico in the Niger regions, where
he had journeyed, hopeless. "The Christian community in
past times aroused the nation to abolish the slave trade and
slavery in British territory. A like task is now before it—
the awakening of the nation to abolish this drink traffic."
Mr. Thompson, whose experience with the African tribes is
considerable, says, further : "The trade in this baleful article
(spirits) is enormous. The appetite for it increases out of
all proportion to the desire for better things, and to our
shame, be it said, we are ever ready to supply the victims to
the utmost, driving them deeper and deeper into the slough
of depravity, ruining them body and soul, while at home we
talk sanctimoniously as if the introduction of our trade and
the elevation of the negro went hand in hand."
The Africans demonstrate the possession of a higher and
better nature, and the consciousness of impending destruction,
by their pathetic and heart-rending appeals to the nations,
which for money are holding by force the accursed poison to
their lips.
The following is a translation of a letter written by King
Malike, of Nupe, to Bishop Crowther, himself an African.
King Malike is a Mohammedan.
Salute Crowther, the great Christian minister.
After salutation,
please tell him he is a father to us in this land
It is not a long
matter, it is about barasd (rum origin). Barasd, barasd, barasd,
by God ! it has ruined our country ; it has made our people
become mad. I have given a law that no one dares to buy or sell
it ; and any one who is found selling it his house is to be eaten up
(plundered) ; auy one found drunk will be killed.
I have told all the Christian traders that I agree to everything
for trade except barasd. I have told Mr. Mcintosh's people to say
the barasd remaining with them must be returned down the river.
Tell Crowther, the great Christian minister, he his our father.
I

AN

APPEAL,

TO

BISHOP

CEOWTHEE.

271

beg yon, Milam Kipo (Mr. Paul), dou't forget this writing, because
vre all beg that he (Crowther) should beg the great priests (the
committee of 'the church missionary society) that they should bee
the English Queen to pre\'ent bringing harasa into this laud.
'' For God and the Prophet's sake; for God and the Prophet his
messenger's sake, he must help us in this matter — that of harasa.
We have all confidence in him. He must not leave our country to
become spoiled by harasa. Tell him may God bless him in his
work.
This is the word-mouth from Malike, the Emir of Nupe."
Malike is one of the most powerful of the Mohammedan
rulers, and his appeal shows how even the restraints of the
religion of the Prophet joined to the '' civil power " were
insufficient to prevent the progress of this commerce in death.
It is pleasant to record that his appeal secured co-operation
from the National African Company, and the consumption in
his kingdom had lessened 25 per cent, last year.
The Berlin Conference, in founding the " Free State of Congo," however, was captured by the liquor power, notwithstanding the efforts of the British envoy and our own Hon.
John A. Kasson, who made strenuous and most honorable exertions to secure the exclusion of the drink traffic from the
jurisdiction of the "state." The German, Portuguese and
some other members of the conference obtained for the traffic
"freedom of trade" and now it is said that at least four fifthsof all that is bought by civilization of Africa through the Congo valley is paid for with strong drink.
SOUTH

AFRICA.

Mr. Waller says that the Dutch and English governments
in South Africa have witnessed the extirpation of some tribes
entirely, as, for instance, the Hottentot, and we do not hesitate
to name " brandy " as the agent here. The Dutch influence
is now dominant in the Cape Parliament, which is always for
the distillers. It is even said that the natives are becoming
too prosperous in some regions, and the brandy cask is thrust
in for their destruction — in other words — deliberate murder
by poisoning, a government engaged in assassination. The
only other historical instance like this which occurs to me is
that of the Old Man of the Mountain.
Three years ago the government commission on the liquor
traffic, comprising many eminent names, reported that :

272

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

The commission has been deeply impressed with the emphatic
and urgent representation contained in nearly all the evidence
taken, and especially from the natives themselves, on the evils
arising from the sale and consumption of strong drinks. All this
evidence points in the clearest way to the use of spirituous liquors
(chiefly ardent spirits the produce of the distilleries) as an unmitigated evil to the native races, and that no other cause or influence so
directly increases idleness and crime and is so completely destructive,
not only of all progress and improvement, but even of the reasonable
hope of any progress or improvement. Those members of the
commission who, for the purpose of taking evidence, had occasion
to visit the Border districts were eye witnesses of the mischief,
wretchedness and misery which multiplied facilities for the sale of
spirits, by licensed canteens in the neighborhood of native locations,
are producing ; if unchecked it can only have one result, and
that is the entire destruction of that portion of the natives who
.acquire the taste for brandy. All the better class of natives, and even
the heathen and uneducated portion^ appear to be conscious of this,
and have implored the commission to suppress the evil which is
bringing ruin on themselves and on their country.
The evidence before the commission was from " Ex-governors, like Sir Theo. Shepstone, K. C. M. G. ; Ex-king
Cetewayo ; Great Chiefs, like Kama ; English Bishops, Local
Magistrates, District Inspectors, Doctors and men of all conditions, running together from different parts of South Africa,
and making common cause against this desolating brandy
drinking."
Rev. Alan G. S. Gibson, M. A., a missionary working in
the Transkei, in a memorandum transmitted to the delegates
sitting on the inquiry at the church missionary rooms, on the
17th of June, 1886, discusses the question at length. I quote
a few sentences : " The bulk of our people are heathen and
uncivilized ; they have naturally strong passions, and no moral, social or religious checks to restrain them ; they must be
restrained by the law from the beginning. It is a case where
there can be no medium, and of this the natives are fully
aware themselves."
Speaking of a liquor proclamation promulgated by the government, the natives held meetings all through the country and
protested against the increased facilities for the purchase of
liquor, which they themselves would derive from this procla-

A

CEUSADE

IN

BASOUTOLAND.

273

mation, and so strong a public opinion was brought to bear
upon government that the proclamation was amended.
Think of it ! A Christian government reformed by the
public opinion of savages. What a tribute to the common
people! He says: "My people, whether Christian or heathen, were unanimous in condemning the proclamation, stating
that drink had ruined other tribes, and that if it ffot amono^st
themselves it would ruin them also. The natives, as a whole,
have sufficient common sense to see this ; they have not sufficient to abstain from drinking when it is in their power."
Mr. Gibson says it looks "ominous for the future, as the liquor proclamation has now been followed up bj^ a measure, carried in Parliament, abolishing the tax on brandy."
He thinks that whatever makes liquor more expensive is a
restraint upon its use. j\Ir. Waller observes: "Again as in
-case of the Nupc people we see in this instance that the unfortunate natives beg to be delivered from themselves
we can trace no disposition on the part of the colonial government, swamped as it is by the Dutch element, to respond
to the appeal ; in f:ict, the recent I'cmoval of the brandy tax
fairly unmasks all remaining mystery."
A most singular narrative is that of a temperance crusade,
(I can hardly call it anything else), l)y which "Drunken Basoutoland" has been converted into "Sober Basoutoland." I
can give only the merest sketch, and this I do for our
encouragement in our own country. " What was the state of
affairs in Basoutoland six months ago is well known. 'Drunken
Basoutoland ! Riotous Basoutoland ! ' has been the common talk of all who take any interest in its future. From
Caledon to the heart of the Blue mountains, brandy had become a curse under which individuals, families and the whole
tribe were crushed without any visil)le hope of rescue. And
yet, incredible as it may look, matters have suddenly taken a
new turn. Our chiefs have all become abstainers and use
now their great influence to oblige their subordinates to renounce strong drinks.
It is a fact that for the last six months
all the principal chiefs in Basoutoland have not
even tasted liquor, and the bulk of their people have done
the same.
Strict watch is kept on the border to prevent
-either the Basutos going into the Free State and buying brandy
18

274

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

there, or the white smugglers entering Basoutoland with
their iiccursed merchandise
The death of an important head man
was a solemn warning given to our
drunken chiefs. Delirium tremens at last got the better of the
iron constitution of the deceased chief. Everybody knew that
drunkenness, and nothing else, had brought him to an untimely and dreadful end. And, all the other chiefs being more
or less affected with that horrible malady, every one of them
had good reason to think of the fate which awaited him if he
did not speedily renounce drinking." Then follows an account
of the way they did it, and after a few paragraphs which read
somewhat like the proceedings in Ohio we are told " that last
but not least we had a visit from the chief, Paulus Mopeli,
who was formerly a member of our church, but who
long ago became a heathen again."
This man seems to have been a heathen Gough or Father
Mathew. He utilized hymns and prayers, and moral and political orations, and made a great impression on all who heard his
clever appeals for temperance and unity. He held out hope
even to the Christians, and "to him I believe is Basoutoland
indebted to a large extent for the happy change which has
been already recorded." But famine and scarcity of money
helped them some, as the Basutos were not able to buy rum
so freely as formerly. " Temptations are plentiful, and the
people are weak. With trembling hearts and much prayer we
are looking at the course of events, every day of temperance
being one more security against the overthrow of our hopes.
What is to happen in coming days no one knows. But this
we know, that six months of temperance is a wonderful
achievement ; that to the present time no sign of an impending relapse of the Basutos into drunkenness is to be discerned,
and that with God's help what seems now to be a temporary lull may become the normal and definitive state of
the tribe."
Courage, Europe and America ! How full of hope for us
poor Christian nations is this bright and beautiful example of
Basoutoland ! Note how they did it. The big chief died of
delirium tremens and the rest had the good sense to be
frightened. Let ours do the same — several big chiefs have
died already.
They stopped the importation and the sale.

AN

EXA3IPLE

FOR

CHEISTIANS.

275

They utilized famine and poverty which we shall be able to
do presently if we continue in our present course. They
tried moral suasion, and prohibitory law, which they enforced
in earnest. Both heathen and Christian lent a hand. And
they did it. Let us do likewise. Here are our superiors.
Let us learn wisdom from them.
Seize hold of truth where'er 'tis foimd
On Christian or on lieathen ground.
All hail, Basoutoland ! Hope of the world ! To thee we dip
every flag of civilization. God grant that thy bad old white
companions may not seduce thee again to thy cups, for, if
savages cannot reform, what hope have we !
How the whole business cheapens civilization and shames
the cheek of even our hypocrisy with red-hot blush !
But we must not linger on this oasis in the desert. " Somehow or other things always go wrong in Africa," and we find
the Portuguese a few miles up the coast admitting spirits of all
kinds at three pence per gallon. The Transvaal is soon to
be cursed with a railroad, and then the tribes which at present are " cut ofi" from intoxicants will come under the scathing influence of a state of things mainly confined to the west
coast hitherto," and the scenes of Dr. Livingstone's "heroic
explorations " are threatened. God is thought to be helping
these. " In one instance the trafficker was drinking from a
demijohn in the chief's hut. By some means the spirit caught
fire and he died in a few hours horribly burned." Mr. John
Moir, the representative of the African Lakes Trading Company, tells us that, in the flat country lying near the sea
between the mouths of the Zambesi river and the Quilimane
estuary, many distilleries exist. "The profits on the sale of
spirits is 700 per cent., as conducted by the European houses.
I have seen boys and girls of about fourteen or
fifteen years of age getting their wages in this poison." "At
the Opium Company's place nearly the whole wages are paid
in spirits."
The Portuguese are doing that. In fact these Portuguese
seem to be the " primal, eldest curse " to Africa, and no continental nation is willing to stay its hand in the least. No
conscience seems to be touched at all save that of England,
and hers appears to be as yet like the embryotic evolution of

276

THE

TEMPEKANCE

MOVEMENT.

moral nature in the crocodile. I would say more, if I was
not obliged to admit that New England and New York are
little better than Old England, and I have some respect for
our own nest. The naked truth is that we are a set of
murderers all together, and the best of us only endeavor to
console our victim with psalms while we cut his throat and
pick his pocket. The w^ork of these blessed missionaries alone
proves to the African that the Christian has any God.
The following data is kindly furnished to me by the oiEcials
of the custom house :
The exportation from the port of Boston to British Possessions in Africa, from July 1, 1882, to July 1, 1887, of spirits
made from molasses alone was 3,147,918 gallons, while in
addition to this there have been large exportations of spirits
made from grain, amounting to 116,792 gallons in the single
year of 1882, also wines, malt liquors in bottles and casks,
and alcohol, etc., etc.
The total custom house valuation of all domestic exportations from the United States to the British Possessions in
Africa, from July 1, 1882, to July 1, 1886, four years, is
$6,648,123; of intoxicating liquors during the same period,
$5,690,909, leaving the value of all other exportation $957,214.
The year 1886-7 is not included, as the returns were not
available at the custom house when I applied for them.
These returns include only the exportation, first, of quantity
from the single port of Boston, and, second, of value from the
United States, for the periods above stated, to the British
Possessions in Africa — i. e., Sierra Leone, Gold Coast, on
the west coast ; Cape Colony and Natal on the south coast,
etc., etc. When we further consider that this does not
include the principal inlets of alcohol to Africa, and that
Great Britain, France, Germany, Portugal and other European countries are far more active in this accursed commerce
than ourselves, and that the manufacture is already rooted in
Africa itself, and that the trade does not probably reveal to
official inspection one fourth of its actual proportions, we can
begin to imagine something of the extent of these fires from
hell with which we are illuminating and burning up the "Dark
Continent," whose historic misfortunes seem to culminate in
our love.

Mrs. Mary

Cle77ie7it Leavitt,

IVorltfs Missionary, National W. C. T. U.

A DAY

OF RETEIBUTIOlSr.

277

Eev. James Johnson said in a speech before a meetino- of
members of the House of Commons, April 1, 1887: "The
slave trade has been to Africa a great evil, but the evils of the
rum trade are far greater."
Mr. W. S. Caine, M. P., says :
" The native races of Egypt are being demoralized
Who buys the liquor now? Why, the natives, whom I am
sorry to say the British soldier has largely taught to drink.
Wherever the Englishman comes in contact with the natives
he drags them down through intoxicating liquors
I went to a temperance meeting in Cairo
all natives, three or four hundred present,
every speaker native of Egypt and speeches in Arabic.
Nearly every speech was in denunciation of Englishmen,
Levantines and Europeans, and Christians in particular for
bringing this accursed drink to them. They were urginoMohammedans, whose religion forbids them to drink, to sign
the pledge as we do here." In fact Mohammedanism would
appear to be the chief hope of Africa, and, if Christianity does
not rid itself of alcohol, may yet be of the world.
Professor the Rev. N. J. Hofmeyer, of the Dutch Reformed
Church, says : "
The drink traffic in South Africa
means ruin and death to the natives. In 1883 it was officially
reported that in two months 106 natives had been killed by
brandy. How many pine away and die under this curse all
over South Africa of which no human record is kept ? What
a day of retribution is awaiting the white man !
except he repent and seek the good of the race he is now
destroying for lucre's sake." Dr. Clarke says that "he had
seen thousands of girls lying drunk around the traders'
wagons."
The Rev. H. W. Little read a paper before the British
Colonial Temperance Congress upon the liquor traffic on the
east coast of Africa, from which I take the following extract,
making no apology for its length, because of the completeness
with which it portrays the methods by which stronger nations
in these modern times are despoiling and destroying weaker
ones under the pretense of civilizing and improving their condition. Itis a false pretense and it would be less cowardly
and more honorable to avow the real purpose and use some
other method than poisoning.
Pirates carry the black flag —

278

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

■which makes their business comparatively respectable. Mr.
Little says, page 232 of the proceedings of the Congress
which was held July, 1886 : ''My work as a missionary of the
Church of England for several years was carried on on the
east coast of the beautiful but afflicted island of Madagascar.
The history of that land is without parallel for pathos and
consuming interest in the history of the world. A century
ago it was unknown. Fifty years ago it passed through a
national crisis from which it emerged, guided by the strong
hand of England, into a new life. You are all aware of the
rapid progress of the Malagasy in their religious and social
life. A nation of idolaters in 1800, to-day they are a nation
of Christians. And for this change they have solely to thank
English non-conformists. The London Missionary Society
sent them missionaries, artisans, printers, and useful men of
all trades and professions. The results were abundant to
overflowing. So mightily grew the Word of God and prevailed." A splendid commerce began to move the land. Its
dormant resources were brought forth and found a ready
market in foreign ports. The vessels of Europe crowded its
magnificent harbors and the people rejoiced in the new era
which had dawned upon them. Their reverence and adoration of anything English was everywhere manifest. They gave
us the highest honor they could bestow. They called us
brethren and fathers and sons.
But they soon began to distrust us, and I fear in the end to
dislike us. We had not been true to them. We professed
to love them for their own sake, and then, alas ! we discover
ourselves to them only as seeking to enrich ourselves at their
expense. Mauritius, the chief colony of the southern Indian
Ocean and the East African seaboard, had gradually developed
immense capabilities as a sugar-producing island. The white
capital of the island soon drifted into this industry and of
course an outlet had to be found for the produce of these everincreasing sugar estates. A ready market was found for the
sugar, but what was to be done with the rum which was
made from the refuse of the sugar mills ? It was not good
enough for European markets. It was too good to waste.
Madagascar was opening its gates with its millions of population in all good faith to the merchandise of its more civilized

INTRODUCTION

OF

SPIEITS

INTO

MADAGASCAR.

279

neighbors. The idea was conceived of making Madagascar
receptacle for the damaged spirit of the Christian English
colony of Mauritius. The stuff was taken down to Tamotave
to be bartered for Malagasy native produce. I need not prolong the story. The native villages soon became scenes of
frightful havoc and misery. The crime of the island arose in
one short year by leaps and bounds to a heiglit too fearful to
record. Like a pestilence, the rum of Mauritius flowed along
the public way and up the country, till it invaded the capital,
Antananarivo, 200 miles from the coast. The native government was seized with consternation. Was this a plot of the
English to destroy them? The king, Eadama I., a prince
of great sagacity and courage, at once saw that something
must be done to save his people. The custom dues of the
port were paid then as now in kind. Every tenth barrel
of the cursed spirit imported was sent to the government
stores. But Eadama would not allow it to be placed with
the cottons of Manchester or the hardware of Birmingham.
He ordered it to be left on the sands, and then to be taken to
the water's edge and poured out, every drop, into the sea. The
merchants of Mauritius were amused ; but they speedily
became indignant, as they saw that the aggressive action of
the king was leading the natives to look upon the rum with
fear and distaste. A grave representation was therefore
made to Eadama by the oflicials of the English government
on the subject. He was publicly depreciating the A^alue of a
British article of trade. He was Aaolating a clause of the
treaty between himself and the imperial government. Poor
Eadama had to allow the cursed stutt' free course or quarrel
with his best friends and strongest ally.
From that time to this the flood has flowed uninterruptedly
over the land. And the Malagasy are suflering to-day and
will suffer till public opinion at home proves too strong for the
thing to be done in the name of England any longer. Eadama's
son, Eadama H., a youth of great promise, fell under the influence of the cursed habit of intoxication taught him by men
of a Christian nation, and he perished after a brief reign of
nine months, crowded with acts of folly and sin, in his own
palace, assassinated by order of his own Privy Council.
A terrible fact is that the natives are now growing sugar

280

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

cane in their own country in order to make this rum, and the
passion for intoxicants is spreading with fearful rapidity
amongst the young men of the higher classes, who somehow
think it fashionable and a mark of high civilization to be seen
in a condition of almost helpless intoxication in public places.
The native authorities deplore this condition of things. They
wish to close their ports to the thing altogether, but Mauritius
is too strong for them, and this crying injury to a perishing
people remains unredressed and unheeded by the most humane
and Christian nation in the world. The same story may be
told with very slight variations in detail of all the native tribes
on the East African sea board. From Natal, from the Cape,
and from all the older colonies of the south, a flood of spirit is
poured into the territories of the native chiefs. Whole villages
are found in a state of intoxication, kings, chiefs, people,
women, children, all in a state of hideous frenzy born of the
fire water of the white man."
I can go no further with this description of hell. Oh,
Christianity, what crimes are done in thy name !
The Archbishop of Canterbury, in a sermon delivered May
2, 1887, in Westminster Abbey, holds out a ray of hope.
It is a dread commerce. But it is rather anti-commerce. The
fear of it and the dread of it will soon be upon commerce itself.
What shall we say of a system which, in the name of
freedom, threatens with extinction all trades but one? What of
bales of goods reshipped because in the drunken population there
was no demand but for drink — because they would receive nothing
else in barter — would take no other wages for the early morning's
work and were incapable when the early morning was past ? "
Just so, and thus we again reach the conscience through the
pocket, and but for this there would be scant hope indeed.
As Mr. Joseph Thompson says, in the Conteiivporary Review
of December, 1886, "for any African who is influenced for good
by Christianity, a thousand are driven into deeper degradation by the gin trade, and Mohammedan missionaries are
throwing down the gauge to Christianity and declaring war
upon our chief contribution to western Africa — the gin trade."
AUSTRALIAN

COLONIES

OF

GREAT

BRITAIN.

As everywhere else on the face of the earth that superior

ALCOHOL

A

MEDIUM

OF

EXCHANGE.

281

civilization are in aggressive contact with inferior conditions
of men, alcohol is one of the most active and deadly agencies
operating against the native inhabitants in the vast regions of
Oceanica, as well as among the civilized pioneers of the great
nations which are now emerging upon the horizon of history.
But I am warned by the diminishing space of this work that
I must be brief in the further consideration of the ravasres of
intemperance in foreign lands. Our chief concern is first
to put out the fire at home.
New South Wales is the oldest of the Australian colonies ;
it contains 310,938 square miles, and is three times the size
of Great Britain and Ireland — five times larger than Xew
England. Its population is one million and rapidly increasing.
N. T. Collins, G. W. V. T., of the Grand Lodge I. O. G. T.
of New

South Wales, Tasmania and Fiji says: "Unfortunately drink has been the great curse of the people in this as
well as in other lands. Alcohol was one of the earliest mediums of exchange, and many valuable properties were bartered away for a gallon or two of rum. One of the first
hospitals in the colony was built by rum, the government
giving the contractors a monopoly in the drink traffic, and it
was long known as the ' Rum Hospital.' This seems to have
been a sure way to furnish patients so long as there were people to drink the rum." Mr. Collins adds : "As in the early
days of the colony a considerable proportion of the population belonged to the convict and lawless classes, it may be
easily imagined that the drink fiend obtained a firm footing,
and that the most horrible crimes were perpetrated under its
influence." But he speaks hopefully of the future. The
Good Templars, and other great and good organizations, are
at work with beneficial results. Restrictive legislation helps
them also, and now the people pay only twenty-three dollars
per head annually for strong drink.
Mr. John Vale, Secretary of the Victorian Alliance, jMelbourne, says that " speaking generally Victoria is neither better nor worse than most of her neighbors and friends." Sho
has a million of people, and the amount annually expended in
support of the drink traffic is $25,000,000 — or twenty-five
dollars for each man, woman and child. Temperance societies.
are active, and the law helps some.

282

THE

Mr. John W.

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Jago, of Dunedin, New

Zealand, says :

"There is no fairer land than this, none richer in resource,
with more genial clime, or richer soils, or finer forests, or
more varied mineral deposits ; no country where the scenery
is more grand, more beautiful or more wonderful. Yet, fair,
beautifully grand as is this new land of ours, Hhe trail of the
serpent is over it all'
while man asserted his dominion over the earth, drink accursed drink, and the devil in
solution, asserted his dominion over man."
During the past ten years the population of the colony has
not averaged over 500,000, and the expenditure for rum has
been £20,000,000, or $100,000,000. Drink causes drunkenness, drunkenness produces poverty, disease and crime, and
Mr. Jago estimates the cost of the traffic, direct and indirect,
at 122,500,000 annually, an amount equal to the entire revenue of the colony. The Good Templars are the chief hope of
all these vast possessions, and the condition of the colonies
already described applies to Queensland, South Australia,
Tasmania and elsewhere in those far-oif, but important, lands.
The native races seem, to cut no figure in the recent accounts.
The same will be true of Africa in fifty years. Like causes
produce like efifects.
THE

CONGO

VALLEY.

In closing the chapter I ofier a few observations, lest they
be omitted later, upon the case of Africa, which demands the
immediate attention of the American people. We first recognized the Congo Free State. We were a part of the Berlin
Conference which chained the liquor trade to her lips by international agreement. It would have been better to have
revived the slave trade, if therewith we had enacted international prohibition of the liquor traffic for the Congo valley.
This government daily commits, by its acquiescence in the
existing treaty-guaranteed wickedness, a far greater wrong
than it would be to re-enslave our own colored fellow-citizens.
The Executive Department of the government should at
once open correspondence with every foreign power concerned, with a view to changing the status established by the Conference ofBerlin and by subsequent events. The Legislative
Department should take still more radical action by prohibit-

LET

CHEISTIAN

PHILAJ^THROPY

ORGANIZE.

283

ing exportation of spirits of any kind to Africa ; by declaring
the trade to be a crime, like piracy on the high seas, and to
be extirpated by force. Build a navy for this purpose, if
necessary, and scour the seas. Let us see what Christian
nation will go to war to protect this plague of the world.
International agreement can be obtained for the suppression of this trade, if a real effort be made by the United
States to secure it. If no such agreement can be had, then
Great Britain and the United States can form a convention for its effectual suppression. If Great Britain will not
join us, we can do it alone. "We face perpetually inward, and
like the ostrich, with his head in the sand, or a bashful boy,
stand with our back to the world. If we leave the Congo
Free State — and so all Africa — where we have helj)ed to place
her by the Berlin Conference, it would have been better never
to have recognized her flag at all. Let the Christian Philanthropy of the country organize, and move on Washington.
The World's Woman's Christian Temperance Union has
already entered upon the work.
It is time it were done.

CHAPTER
THE

REMEDIES

TOTAL

XIV.
ABSTINENCE.

Alcohol the Tyrant of all Ages and Races — Are the Chains of the
Liquor Habit to be Perpetual? Shall there be a "ISTew Emancipation "? — The Forces of the Temperance Reform until lately a Godinspired Mob — A Great War before us — The Emancipation of Fifteen Hundred Millions — Agencies to be Employed by the Organized
Army of Reform Considered : Individual, Associated and Political —
Personal Total Abstinence a Recent Evolution of Christian Civilization — The Dictrmi of Science and Duty.

WE

have now surveyed this monster evil which afflicted
nations, long since personified as the Tyrant Alcohol.
The tyrant indeed he is of all ages, and of every race and
clime. America, Europe, the world, are now in his chains.
There has never been a system of slavery like this which
King Alcohol has imposed upon mankind — so full of horrors, so abject and hopeless, in this life, and so portentous
only of wailing and despair in the next.
The slavery which for hundreds of years was imposed by
civilized ( ?) nations upon the children of ravished Africa
was so dreadful in its origin, and so wicked in its robbery of
the rights of man, that humanity and conscience at last have
overthrown it, even in those regions where it existed in its
mildest and most profitable form. It was, at the worst,
subjection of the body only.
" Still, in thought as free as ever," the black victim asserted
his own manhood, denied the right of those who bought and
sold him, and, appealing to the innate sentiments of love
and of justice which unite the whole family of man, to the
fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of the race, demanded
liberty and equality before the law. Such an appeal must
be heard. It was heard — in every form of protest and indignant expression in time of peace, and finally on a thousand bloody battlefields and on the slippery decks of naval
284

THE

"NEW

EMANCIPATION."

285

strife, until the high judgment of Earth and Heaven has
reversed the foul decree which enchained our fellow-man, and
now the body, like the soul, is free.
But the fierce tyrant whose dominion we are now contemplating, Avorse than the kidnapper of Africa, has lassooed
our immortal natures and enslaved the soul. Under the
slavery which our century has abolished, it was only necessary^ to release the body and the whole man went free.
But here is a thraldom which, while it is destructive of the
body, yet interpenetrates the whole nature, and, by a horrible process of mental and moral, as well as physical, dissolution and degradation, eliminates eveiy quality of nobility
in man, and even of the respectable brute. There seems
hardly anything whatever of being, of personal entity left ;
nothing but the essence, the purest quality of debased, besotted, and grovelling servility.
The man is at last absorbed in his own chains ; there
is no man — all shames and crimes, and nothing more.
Both body and soul are destroyed in hell ; yet the hell
is upon earth, and millions upon millions of us are now
in it, where hundreds and hundreds of millions of our ancestors and of our kith and kin have already died of the worm
which so far dieth not, " the worm of the still." And is
there no escape? are these chains perpetual?
Shall there be no "New Emancipation"? "With me the
millennium is a fact as fixed in the future as the rising
of the morrow's sun. To that more than hope, that faith
which is the substance of things hoped for, I cling as the
fundamental premise in the logic of life. Without this, there
is, to my mind, no syllogism, no conclusion at all. If we may
not believe — yes, know, as we know that the everlasting
courses of universal nature are sure — that there is a higher
and better destiny for the race than this mortal existence, a
time when " all crimes shall cease, and ancient fraud shall fail,"
and once more " returning Justice lift aloft her scale," what
is there to work for here? If the earthly millennium be
impossible, a will-o'-the-wisp, or some miasmatic exhalation
of the mind ; if there be no certainty of a higher and
better state in this world which we have seen, what sensible
ground is there to predicate the realization of our hopes in

286

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

a world which we have not seen ? It is hardly worth while
to prolong society unless there is hope of its elevation and
happiness here. The sooner we are all the other side of
Jordan, and the tragedy of lost Greenland is repeated on
the stao:e of the whole world, the better.
It is this faith in the redemption and elevation of our race
to the enjoyment of untold ages of happiness, here in this
world, which encourages me to believe in the overthrow of
alcohol and in the "New Emancipation." And there is
reason for the faith that is within us.
We do know that certain causes will produce certain
effects ; that, if certain causes result in slavery, certain
other causes lead to freedom. We do know that freedom
need never be lost, and that when lost it can be regained —
not always, for manhood at last goes out and there is nothing: left to be made free. But there are conditions which o-ive
freedom, hope and joy, and we possess them all when these
conditions are complied with. There is a way of escape.
It is long and difficult. By a thousand converging and
ascending avenues, and through more than forty years of
wandering in wastes and wildernesses, humanity must reach
the promised land. But there is such a land, and it becomes
us to be strong and to go up and possess it.
We are entering upon a great war. The battle is over
the face of the whole earth. It is personal, social, national,
international. It involves both hemispheres and all races —
body and soul, time and eternity. It has already lasted
more than one hundred years. We must not falter because
we are to die on the battlefield ; only let us fight a good
fight. Another century may place alchoholism where slavery
now is. That will, indeed, be a new emancipation. How
shall we win this fio-ht ?
Much depends upon the organization of the army and the
plan of battle. Until lately, the forces of the Temperance
Keform have been a God-inspired mob. Many a Bastile has
been taken, but hardly one has been destroyed, and we
almost invariably have lost them again to the inferior but
regular troops of the enemy. It is all-important that we
comprehend what we are to do. We are to capture the
world, to accomplish New and Universal Emancipation, for

i-*

..'S?:- ■<?-

/?P=^■

€S5-,

*«'

Mary

T. Lath7^ap,

President JJ\ C. T. U., of Michigan.

ESTDIVIDUAL

TOTAL

ABSTINENCE.

287

fifteen hundred millions who now are, and for billions who
are yet to be.
How shall this be done?
I do not feel competent to answer this question as it should
be answered ; but the hope to throw a few rays of light (and
I would also of heat) upon it, is the only purpose with which
this book is written.
Human existence proceeds in two forms — the individual
life and the life of society. Intemperance affects both, and
hence all the agencies and influences which they can summon
should be exerted for its extirpation.
These agencies and influences ma}^ be classified as (1)
individual action, (2) voluntary associated action, and (3)
action by the State. The first two constitute those influences
and agencies which are generally known as moral suasion.
The State enacts and enforces law. It is obvious that, since
the evils of alcohol result from the voluntary introduction,
by the individual, of the poison into his sj'stem, the fundamental condition of prevention and reform is total abstinence
by every one from the accursed thing.
This is the first commandment, and the second is like
unto it. Thou shalt assist thy neighbor to abstain like
thyself.
The medicinal use, if there be any, is not included in the
use as a beverage, although when administered as a medicine
it may be in the form of a drink. The complete temperance reformation, for individuals and for society, implies total
aljstinence of the race from intoxicating beverages. That,
and nothing less, should be the high ideal of our endeavor,
although we may climb to the stars by many a weary, tortuous, but ever ascending step. It is clear that, as society is
but the aggregate of individuals, personal abstinence and
reform is the only possible way to general reform. True
temperance reform, then, must begin with the individual,
and it must be brought about by the exertion of his own
will, or by the will of others influencing his conduct, either
by advice or compulsion. The Temple of Reform is l)uilded
of living individual stones, which either take their proper
places voluntarily, or, being placed by the aid of others, remain there by virtue of their own disposition or environment.

288

THE

TEMPEEANCE

MOVEMENT.

Wherever there is will-power there is responsibility ; and
if there be such a thing as sin, that man commits sin who
knowingly and voluntarily partakes of poison as a mere
beverage, a drink.
If there be any act fraught with more danger to himself
and to all those who are about him, whether in relations near
or remote, let it be named. AVhat crime does man commit
attended by such universally bad, wide-spreading, and farreaching consequences as that of voluntar}^ intoxication?
Intoxication stimulates every bad impulse and passion of
body and soul.
It embraces every crime^ in its probabilities — certainly in
its possibilities — whenever it is committed ; and we shall
have gone far on the way to the removal of the great evil
when we say of the drunken man that he has committed the
■crime of intoxication. If, while thus a criminal, he commits
also a murder, I had almost said that he should still be
arraigned at the bar of justice, charged with intoxication, and
the killing should be shown in evidence not as the principal
offense, but as an as^gravation of the orio-inal crime comiiiitted and continued by the voluntary administration of
strong drink, and punished to the extreme penalty of law.
In law a man contemplates the probable consequences of his
own act, and is, accordingly, held responsible whether he
really thinks of them or not. When habitual intoxication has
so tar done its work that the will is gone and permanent
imbecility or active insanity has usurped the moral nature,
responsibility may cease. But if we punished the single act
of intoxication as a crime, he would be a hardened wretch
indeed who could contrive so frequently to offend as to develop the permanent loss of his reasoning powers.
If, then, the voluntary perpetration of acts which are
hurtful to ourselves and to others is sin, the voluntary use
of intoxicating liquors or poison is sin ; and Avhen it goes
so far as to injure society, it should be prohibited by law.
It will hardly be claimed that drunkenness to any extent
does not injure society, since all men are embraced in its
membership.
The law can not deal with trifles, and its practical application can not reach those acts of secluded vice which do not

TOTAL

ABSTINENCE

FUNDAMENTAL.

289

openly touch the public welfare and the good order of
society ; but the act is still attended with personal responsibility inthe forum of conscience, and is still a sin. As such,
it must be distinctly held up to the eye of the mind, and
dealt with in the account between the creature and his God.
In this secret fortress of the soul the primary battle must
be fought ; that battle is within the gate ; it is the struggle of
the garrison to be loyal and true to its primary instinct of
duty to itself, humanity, and God. The creation of this sense
of the commission of wickedness in the act of self-poisoning or
intoxication is the radical work. Without it, all other means
— whether of the press or church or State, or even of friendship and love — will fail. Appetite is stronger than them all.
Conscience alone can conquer alcohol fighting for supremacy
within the citadel of the human soul.
The first great necessity in the temperance reform is,
then, to convince men that intoxication is icrong. This is
the work of religion. It is the special mission of the church
and of all those auxiliaiy agencies which are connected with
organized piety* or piety in action.
The conviction must penetrate further than to the act of
personal intoxication. The man must realize that cursed is
he that putteth the cup to his neighbor's lips. It must go
deeper still, and stir that elemental force, — the profoundest
and mightiest in the universe, — the sense of duty. Then
we will have men aroused to action in all their relations —
to themselves, to others, both personal and as members of
societ}^ and of the State — contending with all their immortal
l^owers for the extinction of a sin and a crime, and for the
elevation and happiness of mankind.
It is not for me further to dwell upon these primary
truths. The field is already occupied by the Christian
church and l,)y all who are laboring for educational and
moral reform.
Total abstinence from the use of mtoxicating drinks as
beverages by the individual — not as a matter of choice
or expediency, but of moral obligation — is, then, as I believe, the fundamental proposition of the temperance reform.
I think this logically and inevitably results from the
fact, which is19 demonstrated by the overwhelming evidence

290

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

already produced, that any alcohol whatever is poisonous
except when used medicinally. If there be a case in which
it is demonstrated to be useful, that demonstration proves the
use to be medicinal. It is a contradiction of terms to say
that poison is beneficial to a person in health.
If it must be granted that it is a sin for one to inflict
needless evil upon himself, it must be still more a sin for
him to inflict evil upon others. It must also be granted that
no one can injure himself without thereby injuring society, of
which he is a part — and to whose other members he will be
rendered either positively hurtful or less useful than his duty
requires him to be, by reason of the self-inflicted injury.
If total abstinence be a personal duty, it must follow that
every member of society should exert himself to make it the
rule for the community. If he owes that duty to his neighbor, itis still more a wrong and a crime for him to facilitate
the use of intoxicating liquors by their manufacture or sale,
or by aiding or abetting the traffic therein.
It becomes an affirmative wrong on his part to promote
by act or by neglect, in his private, social or civil capacity,
this most destructive agency with wdiich the human race is
afflicted. All these conclusions follow from the concession
of the proposition that total abstinence from the use of intoxicating drinks is a personal duty.
If it be a personal duty to abstain, it follows that we must
assist others to abstain also.
If personal abstinence be a duty, the inherent nature of
society compels the concession of still another proposition.
It is the duty of society to impose upon itself that rule which
is binding upon each of its members. Whatever is the
universal duty of society, society must require to be performed. Society acts by public law and by custom, which
is the most powerful of all manifestations of the general will.
The duty of personal abstinence, then, requires the breaking-up of the drinking customs of society, by society, the establishment oftheir contrary, and the enactment of remedial
and prohibitory laws for the overthrow of the traffic.
In view of the sweeping results which flow from the establishment ofthe proposition that personal abstinence is a duty,
the fundamental importance of the doctrine that alcohol is a

MODERATION

SOCIETIES.

291

poison, or hurtful when not used medicdnallj upon which
that proposition depends is at once apparent.
Thus do the researches and discoveries of science become
the foundation of morality, the enlightenment and sanction
of religious and civil duty, and thus do they promote the
general welfare of mankind.
The doctrine or duty of total personal abstinence is one
of the latest evolutions of Christian civilization. It could
not be until the poisonous nature of alcohol to sound health
was established. This view was scarcely entertained until
within the last sixty years, and even now, although clearly
proven, is by no means universally admitted. Its necessity,
in order that the evil of intemperance may be removed, is
partly the demonstration of science and partly of experience
in the failure of the prodigious efforts of society to half-way
rescue itself by legislation, abstinence from ardent and
indulgence in fermented drinks. Moderation Societies and
like emulsions. I do not now refer to the totally abstinent
teachings of ancient religions and Eastern lawgivers, which
might be adopted as the ])asis of modern reform ; but to our
own religion, and to the history of our own civilization. In
the sixteenth century the practice of using intoxicating beverages, distilled and fermented, seems to have been as fully
established and almost as nearly universal among Euro^iean
nations as that of breathing ; and the serious suggestion of
its sinfulness would generally have been considered as absurd
as that of the drinkinij of water. Even the minister of relig-ion appears to have been as oblivious to the idea as the
common recruiting sergeant, and each proceeded to the discharge of his duty in tilling the ranks of their respective
armies, stimulated by the same exhilarating agent. Even
after society was staorfyerins: under the increasino^ burdens of
intemperance in recent modern times, the idea of personal
culpability in the use of liquors had not dawned upon men.
It seems to have been conceded by all that moderation in the
use was the utmost limit of rational abstinence, and neither
by legislation nor voluntary association nor personal restraint
was more to be thought of.
Moderation Societies appeared
in the early part of the
sixteenth century.
The first, or one of the first, was estab-

292

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

lishecl in Germany, in the year 1517. See "Alcohol in History," p.276. It was called the "■ Order of Temperance,"
and was designed to put an end to the custom of pledging
health, and to reform the "higher classes." , These " classes"
were fast being ruined by intemperance. In 1600, Maurice,
the Landgrave of Hesse, established a society the fundamental rule of Avhicli was that its members '^ never should
become intoxicated."
No member "should be allowed more than seven o-oblets
of wine at a meal, and that not more than twice (14 goblets)
a day." Count Palatine Frederick V. established another,
and the members of both pledged themselves to observe the
rules two years. These rules permitted the use of 5110,
goblets of wine by each member yearly ; that was moderation — reformation. Dr. Eddy says that he finds no further
trace of temperance societies for nearly two hundred years.
The Lansingburg
(N. Y.) Federal Herald of July 13,
1789, has the following: " Upwards of two hundred of the
I', most respectable farmers of the county of Litchfield, Ct.,
;,|j have formed an association to discourage the use of spiritli; uous liquors, and have determined not to use any kind of
^

distilled liquors during their farming work the ensuing season."
In 1785, Dr. Rush published his " Enquiry into the Efiects
of Ardent Spirits upon the Human Body and Mind," and the
modern temperance reform was begun ; but then, and for
many years after, the attack was made upon the excessive
use or the abuse of ardent spirits mainly ; while Rush and
Belknap
and others even favored the use of fermented
drinks.
This seems more incredible when they had the lessons of history before them, which, until within a few centuries, recorded only the ravages of fermented intoxicants.
But the explanation seems to me to be the fact that neither
science nor experience had as yet demonstrated the vital
truth — at least, it had not penetrated even the professional
mind — that alcohol is purely a poison.
When that truth is
comprehended, the doctrine of total abstinence is the inevitable and spontaneous
conviction of every sane mind.
As
late as 1833, the Massachusetts Temperance Society merely
pledged its members not to use distilled spirit as a drink nor
to provide it for others.

/s^^

^3

Mrs.

William Sibley,

President W. C. T. U.. of Geargia.

ORIGIN

OF

TOTAL

ABSTINENCE.

293

Dr. Marsh says that, " in the early stages of the temperance reform, some friends of the cause in Boston thought
best to establish a brewery to furnish men, who would
abstain from ardent spirits, with beer." It failed, sinkingsome $20,000 capital, because its managers were honest and
furnished a good article, and hence could not compete with
the cheap adulterations which drew away the patronage of
these model abstainers.
Dr. Eddy sa3^s of alcohol in history, that the first instance
in modern times, of which we have reliable information,
where the principle of total abstinence has been maintained
through the agency of pledges and organizations, is the case
of ]Micajah Pendleton, of Virginia, who, witnessing the
lamentable effects of drinking upon his neighbors, and desiring to fortify himself in all possible ways against becoming
a victim to the evil, drew up and signed a total abstinence
})ledge in the early part of 1800. He induced many others
to sign it, in different parts of the State, but his work was
limited. As before stated, the opposition to the traffic
was almost wholly directed against the al)use of ardent
spirits only, and by the Moderation Societies, until 1833,
AA'hen these " beo-an to ifive way to Total Abstinence Oro-anizations, which, in a few years, obtained entire control of the
temperance work."
]\Iany reasons contributed to this great change in the
pul)lic mind. It had been observed that reformed men
seldom returned to their old habits from resort to ardent
si)irits, but almost always fell by the use of fermented
drinks, which aroused the serpent appetite within as surely
as the distilled; and gradually, all through society, the
evil of intoxication was found to be again spreading by the
substitution of the milder forms of intoxicants. Thus,
the reform itself was being swallowed up in the coming
oceans of fermentation.
Prof. Hitchcock, of Amherst College, who had been
opposed to total abstinence, changed his position in the
light of experience, and declared, " without any fear of
contradiction, that the greatest obstacle to the reformation
of drunkenness is the habitual use of wine, beer, cider, and
cordials by the respectable members of the community ; as

294

THE TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

in very many, I believe in most cases, intemperate habits
are formed and the love of alcohoUc drinks induced by the
habitual use of these lighter beverages." Dr. Marsh said
that alcohol was diffusing itself through all the veins of
society in fermented drinks.
The general observation and study of the subject of
alcohol in its relations to man, by all classes and especially
by chemists and by the ablest members of the medical
profession, with the aroused activities of conscience, quickened by increasing intelligence in and out of the church,
the discussions of the pulpit, of the platform and the press,
which have agitated our own and other countries, have
resulted in the complete establishment, among the great
mass of those who really are determined upon any substantial and permanent reform, and the rescue of the race
from the curse of alcoholic poisoning, of the great doctrine,
or principle, that total abstinence from all intoxicating
beverages is a moral obligation binding upon the conscience
of every member of society, and that the unnecessary use —
and all use but the medicinal is unnecessary — by the individual is vice, if not crime. It is morally wrong for the
individual to inflict injury upon himself as well as upon
others ; and the infliction of injury upon himself is always
an injury to society. This great truth is the only sure basis
of hope in the war of the ages against alcohol, now flagrant
throughout the world. From it flow logically all remedial
measures, whether of voluntary eflbrt, of the church or of
the state.
Build the church of Temperance upon this rock, and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

CHAPTEE
EDUCATIOXAL

XV.
FORCES.

The Policy of Prevention — Education of the Child the Secret of Success— Rescue the Drunkard; but Educate the Child — Home the
Primary Field of Action — The Church Work of Education — The
Public Schools and Scientific Instruction — " Temperance Education Law" — The Bill for National Aid to Education — Its Principles Stated — Its Bearing on the Temperance "Work — Testimony of
Public ^len to its Merits and Importance.

IN the liist chapter the ground is taken that the temperance
reform must be incomplete until total abstinence from the
use of intoxicating liquors as a beverage is the rule of the
individual and of society ; that any use of a poison, save as
a medicine, is necessaril}^ hurtful, and therefore, Avhen used
with knowledge of its character, is morallv as well as ph3'sicall}' wrong ; that nothing can ])e morally right the indulgence
in which is known to be injurious either to the individual
or to society, which is only the aggregation of individuals.
The foct that the injury is in many cases slight, while it may
raisg the question of degree, does not aJSect the quality of
the action. Questions of right and wrong cannot be determined by geometry, nor w'ith the most improved style of
Fairbanks' scales. They belong to the court of conscience,
and that court, and no other, has ultimate jurisdiction of the
temperance reform. Questions of expediency may arise as
to the form and degree of interference by law, and by other
methods, w-ith the traffic ; but they must all be decided by
the test of conscience, with a view to the adoption of the
means and the policy which shall soonest remove the evil and
the sin from among men. In this chapter I wish to call
attention to some of the means to be employed, and their
application, to secure the extinction of the traffic in strong
drink.
Since the community is made up of those who do, and of
those wdio do not, use alcoholic liquors, it is obvious that
eflbrt must be applied to the cure of those who are sick, and
295

296

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

the preservation of the health of those who are well, — in
other words, to prevention and cure. The most natural and
effective and easily available of all means which can be
employed, is the prevention of the manufacture and distribution, by wielding the strong right arm of society — the law.
But a strange mental infatuation has for ages been upon the
mind of civilized man, and, while he would put out a conflao°ration by instinct, he has not only permitted, but has
even kindled, fed and protected the flames of alcohol,
lighted from the infernal pit, by the forces of positive law.
Of this, however, more hereafter.
All possible eff'ort should be put forth to save the drunkard
which does not divert attention from the child. Compared
with the child, it is of little consequence what becomes of
the sot or even of the moderate drinker. Cure is the object
in his case ; prevention of disease, the preservation of health,
and the transmission of uncontaminated life to future ages, is
the great purpose in our treatment of the child.
In all past time, attention and effort have been chiefly concentrated upon the habitual consumer of liquors. This is
natural, for he is the victim whose wounds and bruises and
putrifying sores are constantly on exhibition. He it is who
riots, murders, starves and dies to illustrate the diabolical
horrors of the trade. His performances are of a charc^ter
to engross our attention. And it is indispensable that these
results be heeded and studied, as only in that way are we
enabled to discover their causae, and thus to apply the means
of cure when cure is possible, and to prevent their spread
among those who are not yet infected by the plague.
I would not prevent one heart-throb, far less one single
effort, for the rescue of those alread}^ in the slavery of
intemperate habits. And, besides them, there is an innumerable multitude of those tempted, and occasionally indulging,
who can certainly be saved. It is the highest duty to save
them, and to save them all, or at least to present and press
upon them the opportunity of reformation. Society, when
at all aroused, is not likely to neglect this duty.
Churches and pastors, lecturers and authors, societies,
open and secret, and personal labor and persuasion, in every
form, are all brought to bear, as they ought to be, upon the

RESCUE , BUT

EDUCATE.

297

actual consumer of intoxicating drink, that he may be saved
— and he is saved, sometimes. There is no trophy like
these brands plucked from the burning, although they be hot
generally for a while after rescue, and are too often blackened
and smutty even when the fire is gone out. Compared with
one solitary sheep that was lost, what are the ninety and nine
who never went astray? Whose testimony is like the grateful bleating of this one " poor old wedder " (as the campmeeting hymn expresses it) , as he rides triumphantl}' home on
the Good Shepherd's back, with his eyes scratched l)lind,
his tattered fleece full of buiTs and thorns, and half his
blood sucked out by the ravenous wolf ? As a listener in
temperance meetings, I have sometimes thought it a great
thing to have been a lost sheep — provided he has also been
found. But there is the rub : not one in thousands of the
lost are ever l)r()uglit 1)ack to the fold. Xo wonder that
there is more jo\' in heaven over one such saved than over
the ninety and nine who went not astray. But who can
measure the good which that one rescued lost one sometimes
can accomplish? AVhosc tale so moves and admonishes and
alarms? No, it is impossil)le to do too much to seek and
save the lost ; but the highest and holiest consequence of
such lal)or will fail unless it stinuilates to the prevention of
that in others which in the inebriate it is sought to cure.
The extinction of the alcoholic evil is an educational process. The temperance reform is to be successfully wrought
out among the children of the risins: and of comino; o-enerations. Save the children ; all else is of little comparative
consequence. Everything depends upon education — the
training of the intellect and the heart. This fundamental
process rightly accomplished, the rest follows.
Especially among a free people, whose institutions, customs and laws are fashioned by the popular wall, is education
the principal thing. While growth from the embryo to the
perfect state is common to both, education alone creates the
difference between the savage and the civilized man. In our
day there is perhaps an increasing tendency to forget the
preponderating importance of the moral nature, and to exalt
relatively the intellectual powers ; but conscience, even more
than the knowing faculty, is, and always must remain, the

298

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

fundamental distinction between men and brutes. Any system of development and training which neglects the moral
element in our natures, will work injury and produce dangerous wild beasts, instead of noble, wise and philanthropic
citizens. And as the moral nature is the most important, so
it should be earliest developed. True, that the soul and the
body are a unit — a strange compound of immortality and
matter — and the whole develops together, but not always in
due proportion ; and if the moral nature be half-dormant or
perverted, the mind and body are worse than lost. The first
impressions of childhood are the last which disappear with
age and death ; and all through life those impressions, consciously or unconsciously, fashion character and control action. Hence it is that
HOME

OR

THE

FAMILY

is the primary educational institution of the human race.
The importance of fortunate parentage and of right surroundings inthe home is beyond exaggeration, and whatever
assails its integrit}^, or impairs its harmony and efficiency as
a formative and educational institution, is like the serpent in
the nest of the bird.
The cruel curse of alcohol is nowhere so great as in the
human home. It does in fact strike the human element out
of home, and substitutes not even the instinct of beasts of
prey — that would be a comparative blessing — but all the
malignant activities of hell. The drunkard's home is hell
upon earth. As I reflect upon this sentence, and hesitate to
write so harshly, I deliberately leave it as it is ; for it is moderate, and seems to be complete — rough but true.
Recognizing the necessity of well ordered and temperate
homes, all the great agencies of the temperance reform have
endeavored to permeate them with restraining and elevating
influences, and so upon the home have been concentrated the
strono-est and wisest efforts of the Church and of all reformatory organizations. But it is impossible fully to control its
creation, and consequently the subsequent character of the
home. The family relation is formed with so much freedom,
and often with so little prudence, on the part of those who
enter into it, and especially with such indifierence to the

HOME

THE

PEIMARY

FIELD.

299

alcoholic habit, that multitudes of the homes and mu'series of
the nation seem to have been founded only for the patronao-e
of existing, and to propagate supporters of future saloons.
It is generally impossible to get inside the drunkard's
home with good influences until it has been opened by explosions from within, and its waifs and fragments fall outcast
upon society. Like everything else, the home must be made
right in the first place ; and so it follows that the father and
mother, the original factors of the home, must themselves
have been moulded by the sweet influences which in their
turn they are expected to exert.
And here looms up the greater family still — society itself— the community — the State. This organization exists
from the very nature of things, and is no more an artificial
arrangement than the primary relation of individuals for the
perpetuation of the race. The " social compact " is simply a
responsible but unavoidable social relation. And in this
larger relation, Avhich constitutes the highest sphere of
action, the mightiest and godlicst personalities engage in
high endeavor, and the most benignant and efiicacious labors
are put forth. Here is the field of those who consecrate
themselves wholly to the rescue and redemption of mankind,
and, wielding institutions and inspiring all instrumentalities,
endeavor to concentrate the forces of the State, of the individual and of voluntary association, upon the right education of every child, that the home of the future may be
constantly and forever happy and secure. The motto of the
Women's Christian Temperance Union recognizes, in fact
builds itself upon, the idea of the perfect home — of a home
rescued if need be, but still more of a home which never
has been and which never shall be lost.
" For God, for Home, and Native Land."
Home is the great primary field of action, and other fields
of eflbrt are sought with the ultimate purpose of reaching
the home — if not the home of to-day and of this generation,
then the home of the millions yet to be. "Native Land"
will be just Avhat Home makes it ; and so, with God as their
inspiration, these sacred workers strike home for Home, and
by every form of educative and uplifting influence, they seek
to save the child of to-day, who is the parent of to-morrow.

300

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

So the work of the church is one of education ; education,
primarily, of the conscience and of the religious element in
man. It must be conceded that, in the days which are fast
passing away, through that ignorance which science, observation and experience have now dispelled, the various departments of organized Christianity have not turned their full
power against the most formidable personification of evil and
sin which has ever reared its audacious front against God
and man. But now all is changed, and it is more and more
perceived, as light destroys darkness, that a system of religion, which, in the fullness of its purity and love, not only
prohibits all sin, but demands the affirmative activity of
every power of the soul to promote individual and universal
ofood, is ao-ainst the traffic in alcohol from the law of its own
beino-. And so the church concentrates its holiest and most
comprehensive influences upon home for the education of the
child.
But the home is nnperfect, is often broken, and frequently
fails in the objects for which it is established ; hence, from
imperative necessity, society, in every free country, has
established the school as an institution of the State. The
common school is the nursery of personal liberty and of free
institutions. As conscience follows faith and faith depends
largely upon intelligence, the public school, while designed
especially to give the opportunity for intellectual training and
the acquisition of the useful branches of common knowledge,
is an efficient promoter of moral culture, by developing the
intelligence and mental discipline required for accurate discrimination between right and wrong. When properly conducted, one of the great and direct objects of the institution is
also to instill the great principles of virtue and religion. Not
indeed the technology of sects, but the larger precepts which
are common to all who, within the limits of Christian faith,
believe in the brotherhood of man and the fatherhood of
God. It is a mistake, in my belief, to depart from the general
religious character of the common school as our fathers established it,so far as to omit from its forms the simple exercises
which are a recognition of the Christian's God, and the teaching of the great outlines of Christian faith. No great people
ever did, and probably no great people ever will exist, with-

THE

PUBLIC

SCHOOLS.

301

out some affirmative and general religious faith. The altar
began with the beginning and Avill survive until the foundations of the world crumble away.
Ours is the Christian religion, and that religion is founded
upon the Bible. While I am no zealot, I yet believe that the
common schools of America should teach the common principles of the Christian faith, and its morality, in such largeness of outline as would enable the child of the Protestant
and of the Catholic to sit side by side studying and reciting
from the same text-book of a common faith. The child of
the Free-thinker, of the Je\v, and of the Pagan should certainly receive instruction in the rudiments of the general
belief of the country in which he lives. If that faith be erroneous, it is still better than none, and, in any view, knowledge of it is all-important, as one of the great facts with
wdiich, like a scientific theory or business custom, that child
will constantly collide in the experiences of after life. That
faith docs now constitute, and I believe forever will constitute, the very spirit of the constitutions, laws and customs
under which he must live. There is no danger that the doctrines of Christianity, as taught by the ^Master himself, freed
from the secondary and unimportant dogmas of particular
sects, will harm any child ; and the general good demands
that the o'reat formative institution of the State — the common school — should at least teach the few essential doctrines
of a positive morality enforced by the sanctions of a positive
religion.
The homes of those children whose parents are averse to
this can be depended upon to conil)at, so far as they should
be controverted, doctrines which in the opinions of the parents are likely tc exert a pernicious effect, while the very
large proportion of children who otherwise will receive no
affirmative instruction in moral precepts at all, seems to compel the adoption of some degree of unsectarian moral and
religious training, in the perfect common school. I believe
that the dangerous warfare between the public and the
denominational, or parochial, system of schools now waging,
and which is so portentous of coming calamities, could easily
be averted if the wise and good men who lead the great
divisions of Christian thouoht would brino- to the solution of

302

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

this difficulty a mere fraction of the skill and ability which
have been exercised in the creation of prejudice and estrangement in the past.
That this has not already been done indicates that our
Christian Alexanders have worlds yet left to conquer ; and I
believe that all Christendom would hail with enthusiasm some
demonstration that Christian leadership fully comprehends
its great opportunity ; and also this further certainty that
the Spirit of the Age will destroy any power which seeks to
restrain the blessings of universal knowledge, or to hedge in
the aspirations of the humblest human soul. There are
thinirs to be done which havp never been attempted. It is a
long way yet to the promised land. Why will not the
religious leaders of Christendom enter upon the great work
of these latter days ? Why should the bosom of the church
be more exclusive than the bosom of God ?
Assume the millennium as a fixed fact. These difficulties,
then, must be solved. When? Why not now? The
Spirit of the Age, which is the spirit of the Almighty, will
accomplish its work, and those who do not choose to fight in
harmony with the stars in their courses can take the other
alternative, and perish with Sisera.
The common school is the one institution for which every
intelligent American patriot will, if need be, die. There is
no earthly power which can make successful war upon it, and
there is no heavenly power which will not be put forth to uphold and defend it. Let religion imbue this institution with
the very spirit of her most vital inspiration ! Let her mould,
fashion, elevate, beautify and perfect it. But the free school
lives whatsoever else among our institutions dies. The free
school is the republic.
Esto perpetua I
TEMPERANCE

IN THE SCHOOLS.

Until within a few years, about one generation, there has
been no attempt to spread a knowledge of the human body
through the agency of the public school. This most useful
of all information was locked up in the books of a learned
profession, and was as sacredly guarded as the heathen mysteries. But the medical profession is now, I had almost said,
the sreat benefactor of the race.

Mrs. M. H. Hunt,
Superinioidcnt Scientific Temperance Instruction in Schools and
Colleges, National W. C. T. U.

SCIENTIFIC

TEMPERANCE

INSTRUCTION.

303

The knowledge of anatomy, physiology, and hygiene, of
the structure of the body, of the functions of its various
parts, and of the laws of health, has been simplified, put into
intelligible forms of expression, and laid upon the desk of
every child in the common schools of the republic. It is
impossible to conceive the full importance of this addition to
the course of common school education. Every intelligent
American child has now the opportunity, and most of them
improve it, to acquire a better medical education than was
possessed by Hippocrates or Aristotle, and the time is now
at hand when we may hope that the common people will
possess, and will transmit the sound body and the sound
mind which knowledge of the structure and laws of their
organization alone will bestow.
The experience of a century of effort in combating the
evils of alcohol has demonstrated that nothing can be depended upon for their removal but a general knowledge of
their nature and extent among those not already victims of
the appetite. There is, in fact, no hope of permanent success save in childhood educated, and therefore warned that
alcohol in all its forms, however beautiful and seductive,
is simply a poison, which at last bites like the serpent and
stings like the adder. When that impression is the earliest
and most powerful one upon the mind, it will be impossible to
tempt the uncontaminatcd appetite, and the child, informed
of the real nature of the bowl Avhich s[)arkles for his destruction in the gilded saloon, will no more enter there than he
would seek happiness in the home of some pestiferous
disease. The overmastering and instantaneous impulse when
tempted will be the same as if a bowl of any other liquid
poison, whether of aconite, or prussic acid, or of strychnine,
w^ere proffered to him ; and there being as yet no appetite to
conquer this natural dread, the child, thus fortified by knowledge, isalmost sure never to contract the habit, into which
past generations, misled by their ignorance, have fallen almost
as readily and universally as they have taken their natural food.
More and more have philanthropists come to comprehend
that in the education of the child lies the whole secret of
success, and hence during the last ten years the most strenuous efforts have been put forth in our own country to uti-

304

lize the common

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

school as the nursery of the great reform.

The Women's Christian Temperance Union has been the
most important agency in this, as in fact it has come to
be in all strictly temperance work and social reform. Its
department of scientific instruction, under the charge of
Mrs. Mary H. Hunt, has been devoted with great assiduity
and corresponding success, during the last eight years, to
securino- such leo-islation, local, state and national, " as shall
make the study and teaching of the laws of health, Avith special reference to the effects of stimulants and narcotics upon
the human body, obligatory throughout the entire system of
public education." Already in half the States of the Union
has the study of the nature and effects of alcohol and other
stimulants been introduced by law into the common schools,
and in all the remaining States the agitation is favorably
progressing, while the nation itself has already enacted
probably the most efficient " Temperance Education Law "
that ever was devised ; and that national law is in actual
operation in the District of Columbia, the Territories, and in
all military and naval schools of the United States. Nor
is the educational effort of the Union, under its various able
and zealous superintendents, confined to common schools ;
it extends to higher institutions of learning — to Sundayschools, temperance kindergarten, kitchen garden, temperance literature, press department, the suppression of impure
literature, the relation of temperance to labor, a department
of narcotics, and a national temperance hospital and trainingschools for nurses. Thus does this great organization proceed in its work of moral enlightenment with a sj^stematic
grandeur of action almost like the motions of the stars.
But the utilization of the common school in the temperance reform is perhaps the most important of all their work.
Already it may be accounted as done, for it has acquired
such momentum that it will be impossible to delay its full
accomplishment much longer. The inquiry then arises, To
what extent is the common school itself sufficient for the
work ; and in what ways, if in any, should it be strengthened and promoted, both for the purposes of general education, and as the chief means of spreading permanent temperance reform?

NATIONAL

THE

EDUCATION

EDUCATION

BILL.

305

BILL.

For some years past I have had occasion to study the
condition of popular education in this country, and have
endeavored to place the truth in regard to it before the people. The census of 1880 revealed much that was mortifying
to our national pride, but that feeling might well disappear
in genuine patriotic alarm at the immense and increasing
illiteracy of many sections of the Union. Especially dangerous is the condition of the great northern cities, and of
the rural white and the general colored population of the
South. In some of the southern cities the white children
have fair school privileges, and in a few those privileges are
excellent. Since the taking of the last census, in some
instances there has been an improvement ; but, on the
Avhole, although popular anxiety has increased in those
sections where the necessity is greatest, yet, by reason of
the unequal diffusion of taxable property, and in fact the
general poverty of the people, who have, as the statistics
of education show, cheerfully submitted to heavy burdens
to establish and develop their school systems, the opportunities for common school education have not increased. In
some few places, where the investment of capital has developed a business center, schools have improved ; but vast
masses of the rural population are now worse oft", if possible,
than they were ten years ago. This conmientar}^ is not true
simply of the colored race but of the white race also ; and I
think the problem should be considered quite as much with
reference to the latter as to the former. It is true that in a
certain sense the nation ma}'' be specially responsible for the
condition of the negro, because the nation as such set him free.
But, on the other hand, every national question should be
dealt with for the general good, and for the prosperity and
happiness of the whole people in all time to come, regardless of
race and previous condition. In this view it is far more important to educate the children of fourteen millions of the white,
rather than the children of six millions of the colored race ; at
the same time it is of infinite consequence to educate both.
But the man who now, after the lapse of nearly one-fourth
of a century, can cherish the resentments of Avar against
20

306

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

the proud, gallant and patriotic people who are nationally
bone of our bone and flesh of our flesh, Avith common memories of a high and sacred history, more precious than ever
united any other nation in the whole course of time, and a
destiny of anticipated glory which outshines the sun in
heaven, is hardly worthy to be called an American citizen.
I am profoundly desirous that the colored American be fully
educated, that he realize every right and privilege guaranteed
him by the constitution and the laws — and too often, alas,
he is deprived of them ; but his complete emancipation depends upon the education and improvement of the still more
numerous and more powerful white population by whom he
is surrounded, and upon whom the burden of his education
is all too heavily cast. The white man of to-day is no more
to be blamed for the existence of slavery, or for its consequences, than the negro himself. It is utterly impossible to
lift the negro above the white people around him, and it is
not desirable to do so if it could be done.
It is unnatural and abhorrent to a healthy nature to neglect
its own race in sympathy for another. It is stupendous foll}^
to do so when thereby we degrade ourselves, without benefit to
the colored man. No, equal and exact justice to all. There
is room enough in this broad land for both. There is always
room for all when there is justice for all. But even one little
wrong will have justice, or it will overthrow the universe.
THE

ILLITERACY

OF

THE

COUNTRY.

The table on pages 308 and 309 exhibits a condensed statement of the educational condition of our country, as compiled
in the year 1882, from the returns of the last census. It is
the best that exists, and is substantially correct to-day. Population has increased from fifty million to sixty million, and
will be sixty-five million by the next census ; but expenditure for schools, and their general status, are no higher now
than when this table was prepared, and it should always be
remembered that any substantial change in the condition of a
people requires persistent effort and the lapse of many years.
The lessons of the census must still be substantially true.
Causes have not been in existence since it was taken which
could have efiected any great and favorable transformation.

EDUCATION

BILL

PRESENTED.

307

The work of Hon. John Eaton, late Commissioner of Education, and now President of Marietta College, in depictino;^
statistically and otherwise, the educational condition of the
country, has been most laborious and of inestimable value.
I am proud of an opportunity to pay this slight tribute to
one of the great benefactors of his country.
With a view to assist temporarily in the equalization of
school advantages throughout the country, and to prevent
the prolongation of the alarmirfg illiteracy of the present by
substituting for it general intelligence as fast as the coming
generation can be educated, what is known as the " Bill
to aid in the establishment and temporary support of common,
schools " has been pressed in the national Legislature since
1881. This bill has been twice passed by the Senate, the
iirst time, April 7, 1884, by a vote of 33 to 11, the second,
March 5, 188G, by a vote of 36 to 11. Although strongly
pressed, and in the last Congress having more than a twothirds vote in favor of its passage, as shown by the ayes and
noes taken on filibustering motions made to prevent, and
which did prevent its consideration, it has never yet been
acted upon by the House.
In support of this bill, I had the honor to submit remarks
to the Senate, a portion of Avhich I here transcribe because
they give a more condensed statement of the condition of
the country, and of the absolute necessity of action for the
safety of the republic, than I can well otherwise present :
" Mr. President, I now come to certain propositions which
I think are fairly deducible from the premises already laid
down.
These propositions are, I think, true :
"First. That intelligence and virtue generally diffused
among the masses of the people are necessary conditions to
the existence of republican governments in the nation and in
the States.
" Second. That in so far as ignorance and vice exist republican o-overnments fail, and that although the forms of freedom may continue, yet the substance will be eaten out and
ultimately the fabric itself will fall.
" Third. That there is now in all parts of the country a
dangerous degree of ignorance among the people, and that
those invested with the sovereignty, which is the sufirage,,

308

THE

•8;i.tAV }OTi m30 oqAV
uoijuindod p8.iO[oo
IBjb; JO aS^^UBOJaj;
■jaAO pu'B 9Sv
JO 8JU3jC VIB% 'a^I-IAV
;oii uvo oqAY uor;
-i3|ndod paaoioD xe^oj,

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

^O^-l-i^(^<T-l.-^«■*IM•^tl^Ol^il^iCMC^)0:l^t^^O^-l-*^^-l(^^C^^C^C^(NC^T-^
ooomocOT-H-^ioooooiTH^roMooLooc-j^
>-l M O O

T-1 i-(

5^ r-l O CO tH -O C-! -tl •

rt I

•UOT}

oo-*co^^ocoooQO-*ir^o«iiO'H^(N^omr^oo-*(-+iooooj
--Bindod paaojoo ii3;ox

WOC'iO^

'rt^COr-tTtHlN.OO

t-It

aD'^ioooococoooooQOO^^.oolC'-'oooo(^?-^iCr-^loH^oocoGOO

■jaAo pire asH
JO sj'BaiC na| 'ajiJAv
^OU
WBO
Ol[AV UOIJ
-■B^ndod aju[A\ it3;ox
•nop

£^Tt(CQOO«t^OOOCO'tl-+IOOOt^OOr^'^OOOOOC<!0000^0«500
OC^'tlOOOlO-*IOOOCOOOC'»OmoOCK"Ol0^lOCOO-*<'-icoC^i-10

00r^O'^rH00r-HCl0^00r--r^C0^t^OOClC0rHT--JOC0rHOi>;-^lOW
H r^iH WCO-jH

^ ■* THC;oooi>»u::)X)00oooot^o:^

100T-lrttOCit^OtD100«^00010
OjOMOOC^tO^OOOOT

a4ii[A

-Bpi

dod

Q

r-t

•a^iJAi }ou nuo oqAv
'
noi;T3[ndod
8;u[Ai
IBjbj JO aSB^uaojaj;

o

H

y-t Oi

Eh

V

t^io

x

•ajwAv ion
uijo oqAi noTiiqndod
{■6:^0; JO aSBjuaojaj
-.laAo
piiB aSu JO sJuaX
uaj 'a}i.iA\. jotr uuo
oqAV uo'ijBindodpjjox
•pxia.i joii
uuo oqAi noniqndod
IBjoj

JO

05-*l(MMMO-*IQ0010-*tOCJ

ofo
^iCT-To'co'croo C^ro cTw^OO TtH"x In. Tti iC tH CO tJHO C; (N O Ci c^ to
eOCOOOG^i-tCOC^^^rHT^C^COCO^Ot^lOrt^fN^rHt^r^C^iCO-^Oi-l
o
lorN.T-iO'-iiHi-HT-iGO
OCT. (©Cioo-^y^iN.i:^:ci^THO
-^
co
i-l >H
IN
COr-l rH

>-l

coicr^ooc;-or^-jH^ioiAOC^JOiN.ocorN.c^7 00T-HOswoocooocoo?

t^ir!W5O-*-*l'^-*<00C0O00I^'^CiOC^OOQ0OC0t0^-+lr-.C00i'M
-tl-+l'-l00r^.'M{Nt-itN.00'-'!>.OOOt^C»00t^00C0l>)-*HO"OOC-!OO
ooioC'icooaO'tiCii

-dHr-l':tHCOr+H^CiOOCltOCOr^O
lO

T-l'-l

COCiOO^Ot^CS^COOOrtHlOTtHCOOOCOOT
i-H-l C^(N

^ G: o ^ CO o lo

aS-Bjaaojaj
•jaAO

puB aSu JO s.reaX
uaj 'pi3a.i joa uvo
oqAv uoij^pidod [bjox

o-+lc■^cn■^iO^-.o.^JdiQ0'-'t^O"

moo^r^oi^ccTHcooo^T-fioooosocowt^cot^ociC^iOt-i
O-+IC'ia^'>JOC-^OCQGiQ0i-ir^O^ClC:jrt<C0rhlQ0C0t^Ci00inOOGi
■-

•uoijBindod ii?jox

■■ O

O

CO J^ 1-1 O

CO •+< 'H O

00 CO o

-H c^
M «3
«3 O
Oi ri
C-! cy
Mr-.00-*l«OOCr>00-*<COtDO'-ICOG5eoC'!0
7^ t_J ooco
T/ ^ -T"
^:j !>1^ o;
t^ UU T" ^iJ UU ^i UU ^1 tfj t^ ^«J I— I lAJ (Ji t
--o-*ooo?-)co-*<i^o-ncot^t^Ma>-*co-*icoa)cox«ocoi
cot^t^Ma>-*co-*icoa)cox«ocoiotO't<
OClcOOOGiOOr^OC^i-lr
^.-(
T-i IN

>>5

■ ":)■1 'r-o3 fD„ ^_s ,
a.^£:-S s o^.3.g ^ g g g-3 S S.2.S.S.2 o'S 3S |
— 3-S^32
i =-; T 03 O O
r::' rK ^ ^ .=^ o ><- '^ . T >=! >=< -^ "^ i^ >^ •=< k ■
<!!^^oc:;ioQaQfeOwMM5Mt«<h:iSi^SSSSSS;2il2;;z;

OUR

NATIONAL

309

ILLITEKACY.

oc;or?:sor?C5^ooc".
H o x re Ti r>. c: X ■—
o oociiac^
— *^ r? ^^ 00

C: -t< =■■ C» C) CC iO M ?! 00 C( C X I^ t^ o C-. r!

|. I. <|

o X X o^^_^c^x iO -J^ o o^iq^o^i^cv^Ci^x^cc^
«)Stso(x<-ioo
oosi
(TO c^

■Si"

'^ ^

CONO-t<OOOiMOOC5lO-<MWeOO-*C'J

3 c. l^ 1- _
(NrHrt

. -- - «

- .
(M^

— *

^

O

—

5

o

^ ^ £

i^ — < ji « p lo M c;. 'jj :2 rj rt 00 x c t^ 00 r^

o_'-' o^ X — '_ — ' — ■_^ ~( rt "_-^_.— r; X
o «,
-i' o"
cc
rfT
r^'.-T
,-r

— < o ri o ?! »o r» r^ «5 fc (

: r^ lo X o ?J r»

o t= o 1--; r^ r? -t< r? X ?> ?> -c r^ ri C-. c X o
-»< o o 1^ -f rj — ■ C-. -n ri « 7J r? i.-; x i^ ■.■: o
c^ •->_ -w^ — ^ X_ -fi_ o_ I >^ X, w -?<_ x_ x_ r:_^ aC rt 13 o
o
c?"r-r
}C-^c^ o'o' xT'C c'r^' oX o
lO o —c'rf^'isT
•-= :
c< ^ ^
c-< ■ « tl «

-j;r5 ■*4<CO ri?! C!«T( i^?! «q !■

«

. =

-

-_ - - o X 00J ?! o C-. =-. C-. •*<i< =■- ?!:

-*<ocQa50iom-Hr?i.'?'
3 C3 ?! Ci 13
t^ CC
r-^o q^oo i>-^r?^»-<^-*^^r^c?^?!^QO c^-t^«_ o w '
c?i300x
-ri.-i?ic:o
»-< r?
»-i
cc c? ?! ^-^cc

o

S

ft 2 "5 a

■^ i-Tr-T ^

~

so

«"

H

•i 2
tp g

«

o —

£ ii

■s *•.= io

c;

ft f
ii o

- i: o
o ->^
f=
»J

? ■=

0)

310

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

are, by reason of ignorance to a dangerous degree, unfitted
to exercise the functions of government.
"Fourtli. That this mass of ignorance is increasing and
not diminishing, although there has been a slightly greater
inprease of population than of illiteracy, relatively, during
the decade from 1870 to 1880 in the country as a whole.
" Fifth. That in many parts of the country conditions are
growing rajDidly worse rather than better, and that the evil
is of that peculiar nature that the local power and disposition to apply the remedy grows less as the necessity for
it increases.
" Sixth. That the danger to the country is everywhere,
although the disease may be largely local ; that ignorance
anywhere circulates everywhere, and poisons the political
and social life of each State and of the whole people.
" Seventh. That the remedy must be applied by those
who perceive the danger ; that if there is anywhere indifference to the remedy, it proves that there is the more occasion
for its use, and that the insensibility of the patient requires
at once such measures on the part of those still in relatively
sound health as will prevent the spreading of the plague ;
and that the cry of physicians and nurses for help should
control our action rather than the convulsions or the stolidity of the patient.
" Eighth. But in this case there is neither indifference nor
stolidity ; there is simply an inability to combat the plague
unaided, and a cry of distress. Ignorance is worse in a
republic than the pestilence.
"Ninth. That the exceptional degree of illiteracy prevailing in some parts of the country, as it constitutes a common
danger, so it is the result, historically, of causes for which the
whole country is responsible, and that those portions of the
land which have been free from the immediate presence of
the institution to which we trace the evil, are not without participation inthe guilt as well as the lucre which appertained
to it.
" That everywhere the pharisee business is played out, and
the prayer of the publican is in order.
" Tenth. Those parts of the country where there is least
illiteracy have, as a rule, received already very largely pecu-

Mrs, E.
Pres.

I] Merrick,

IK C. T. U., of Louisia/ia.

EDUCATIONAL

BILL

IN

CONGRESS.

311

niary assistance from sources which originated in fortunate
location and the wise providence of those who lived before
them, and that there is justice in the request for help made
by those whose ancestors acquired and defended the soil
whereon these happy millions and glorious institutions now
repose in prosperity and strength.
"Eleventh. That there is no State or Territory in the
Union where the facilities for common-school education
should not be greatly increased, and none where twice the
amount of expenditure and effort now going on might not
profitably be made.
''Twelfth. That local taxation is very heavy, falling
chiefly upon homesteads and visible personal property and
the estates of those least able to bear taxation, which should
come from the surplus of society and not from its primary
means of existence, while the national income is derived
mainly from things either better not consumed at all, and
therefore the more heavily taxed the better still, because
there will be the less of that harm which comes from
consumption, or from articles paid for by those who
have the surplus earnings and accumulated wealth of
society.
"Thirteenth. That since, at the present time, the national
taxation is far less burdensome to the masses of the people,
upon whom falls much more heavily the weight of the
support of State and local institutions, and also, since the
existence of the nation is as much imperiled by ignorance
as the perpetuity of the States, therefore the common good
requires the appropriation of national aid to the support and
maintenance of common schools.
" Fourteenth. That this aid should be distributed in such
way and should continue so long as is necessary, in order to
equalize the facilities for common-school education, and to
once elevate the status of the masses of the community to a
high standard of intelligence, at which point and after which
the community would, in self-defense and from the instinct
which inclines men to keep a good when they possess it, be
sure to educate itself sufficiently Avithout national help.
This is proved : that sj'stems of education are best supported
and most firmly fixed in the most intelligent States.
Those

312

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

States would as soon surrender their liberties as their schools.
They are synonymous.
"I now pass to consider the ability of the different sections
to bear taxation. The ability of communities to bear taxation is not in proportion to their relative total wealth or
property. But there must first be deducted as properly
exempt from any imposition so much property and producing power as is necessary to subsistence, and taxation cannot
be sustained except upon the surplus remaining, if any.
The valuation per capita of the New England States is $661 ;
of the Middle States, $473 ; of the Western States, $334 ;
of the Territories, $211 ; of the Southern States, $155 ; of
the colored population, not over $5 ; average of the whole
country, $337.
" But the ability to bear taxation depends upon producing
power at the time the levy is made as much as upon accumulated property, for property will not sell, and consequently
cannot pay, unless producing forces are active.
" The census shows that from 1870 to 1880, in the States
of Virginia, West Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, Texas,
Arkansas, Kentucky, and Tennessee, thirteen States, there
was a net loss in valuation of $202,868,844. In Texas there
was a gain of $170,631,586; in Georgia, $12,253,080;
North Carolina, $25,721,580; total, $208,606,246. Consequently the total loss of valuation in the other ten States
enumerated was the enormous sum of $411,475,090 in ten
years.
" Bear in mind these are not the ten years during which
the slaves were liberated. These were the ten years between
1870 and 1880.
" Mr. Miller, of New York. — If it will not interrupt the
Senator, I should like to ask him if it is not possible that
that difference or shrinkage of value in some of the Southern
States is accounted for by the difference in the value of
money in the census reports, being currency in 1870 and
gold in 1880?
" Mr. Blair. — I cannot say in regard to that. That is an
open question, upon which everybody can draw his own inference. But during the same time, in the country at large, as

EDUCATIONAL

BILL

IN

CONGRESS.

313

the Senator knows, the aggregate valuation, which undoubtedly was made upon the same substantial basis in all parts of
the country, very nearly doubled. It went from sixteen
billion to thirty billion dollars or more, if I recollect arioht.
I will not vouch for figures, but I think it w^as from sixteen
to thirty billion dollars, the actual values. The Senator will
observe, too, that in three of the States enumerated there
was an actual increase: in Xorth Carolina of $25,000,000,
in Texas of $170,000,000, and in Georgia of $12,000,000.
I apprehend that the valuation is substantially on the same
basis.
" Mr. Edmunds. — How do you account for it?
" Mr. Blair. — I account for it in the actual diminution in
the cash value of the property in those States, if the figures
are wx)rth anything.
"Mr. Edmunds. — But how do you account for it?
" Mr. Blair. — From the general influences that operated
in that section of the country. I think the data before the
country very plainly shoAv in most of these same States a
quickening and revival in the business tendencies and in the
business activity of the people, and a general inclination to
the investment of capital from abroad. The people are
turning their attention to industrial questions, and very
rapidly. The face of the South is being transformed, and
the old poetic quotation will come in one of these days : the
South w'ill really bud and blossom as the rose, and that
before a great while. But between the years 1870 and 1880
we all know the condition of the Southern country, and I do
not think I could elucidate the subject in such a way that it
would be better understood than the honorable Senator from
Vermont and others alread}' understand it.
" The lack of education among the masses of the people is
undoubtedly one more reason why property depreciated ;
perhaps the greatest reason was the absence of schools, and
that was one cause why northern immigration failed to find
its home in the South rather than in the West. If there is
anything that a Northern man or a Northern family wants, it
is a chance to educate the children. They wall not go
where there are no schools. It is only by the establishment of schools that that portion of the country can avail

314

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

itself of the natural tendency to immigration in that direction, either of individuals or of capital.
" The decrease in the losing States varied from 45 to 78
per cent. I call attention to the thread of what I was sayino-, showino- a decrease in the valuation in ten of those
States of $411,000,000. During the same ten years the
increase of population was 4,006,982, which is, I suppose,
at least 30 per cent, of the population of the same thirteen
States in 1870.
" Ignorance and poverty procreate faster than intelligence
and wealth.
"Again, ability to bear taxation for a certain purpose will
depend upon the other existing demands for the application
of revenue. In a great section of our country the fixed
capital, the houses, structures of all kinds for residence and
business of every description, highways, and other means of
transportation, etc., were lately destroyed by fire and sword,
and when for that reason they have to be replaced, or must
be produced as a primary condition to existence and advancement for any reason, the taxation, such as poor and struggling communities can bear, must be greatly absorbed in
these uses. A community has certain primary physical
necessities like an individual, and as he must eat before he
learns to read, so the community must provide for some
things even before it provides completely for the intellectual
culture of its children ; hence it would be expected for all
these causes that the people in the Southern States would be
able to pay far less for the support of common schools than
other portions of the American people. Yet, as a fact, they
pay in proportion to their valuation, in proportion to their
capacity to be taxed, a great deal more for the education of
their children.
It is not a question of effort, but of strength.
"The rate per cent, of school to total taxation is, in New
England, 20.2 per cent. ; Middle States, 19.5 per cent. ;
Western States, 26.6 per cent. ; Territories, 22.4 per cent. ;
Southern States, 20.1 per cent. ; average, whole country,
22.6 per cent.
"Mr. Edmunds. — Do you mean on the total valuation?
" Mr. Blair. — No ; the percentage of school taxation to
the entire amount of taxation.

y. C. Price,
President of Z ion's College, Raleigh, N". C.

EDUCATIONAL

BILL

IN

CONGEESS.

315

" Mr. Edmunds. — To a fixed ratio.
" Mr. Blair. — Taking the entire taxation of the country
and dividing that taxation into groups, the New England
States, the Middle States, the Western States, the Territories, and the Southern States. In New England 20.2 per
cent, of all taxation is given to education, to schools.
"Mr. Edmunds. — That percentage of the total for all
purposes ?
" Mr. Blair. — Of the amount of all taxes raised and collected. For instance, where there is $100,000 raised in any
given community in New England, $20,200 of that $100,000
is applied to schools; in the Middle States, $19,500 of the
$100,000 is applied to schools ; in the Western States,
$26,600 is applied to schools ; in the Territories, $22,400 is
applied to schools; in the Southern States, $20,100 is
applied to schools ; and the average for the whole country of
every $100,000 of taxation is $22,600. It has a very
imjDortant bearing on the merits of the proposition that this
table be understood.
"I now proceed to consider the increase of educational
expenditures required. I have not dared to make these calculations upto what I think they really should be ; they are
the minimum. The education of children is a 1)usiness just
as much as the running of a government, or a line of transportation, orthe raising of crops. A plant is first required.
The child, ignorant of his letters, is the raw material ; and,
in theory at least, the young man or woman, instructed in the
rudiments of knowledge and skilled in the primary arts for
its acquisition, is the manufactured article.
"Falling back upon the returns of the Bureau of Education of 1881, the latest and most reliable we have, and bearmg in mind all that I have said in the early part of my
remarks of the increase since that time, and the enlarged
proportions of the problem we are dealing with, I ask
attention to the following facts :
"In 1881 there were children of the school ages in the
United States not enrolled, that is, not attending at all anywhere in public or private schools, 6,030,936.
" I will here state that educators complain everywhere
that they lack accommodations for those who are actually

316

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

enrolled. There are no school-houses for their accommodation. In fact, there are not sittings for more than are
enrolled anywhere. A school-house for fifty pupils cannot
cost less than $300. We have, then, a necessity for increase
of school-houses 120,567, and of teachers at least the same
number. The houses would cost $36,170,100 ; if you fit the
teachers with one year of instruction, at $250, $30,141,850;
teachers' wages for three-month school, at $30, boarding
themselves, about 50 cents per day — one-third pay of
diggers of ditches and drains — $10,854,930 ; cost of
books, which must be paid for by some one, $180,782 ;
total, $77,347,662, to provide the plant and run it three
months for the instruction of the children not now attending
school at all in this country.
" Take now the seventeen Southern States, including the
District of Columbia. There were not-enrolled children of
school ages returned to the bureau in the year 1881, 2,873,399; school-houses and teachers required, 57,465; cost of
houses at $300 each, $17,239,500; cost of fitting teachers
at $250 one year, $14,866,250 ; pay for three months,
wages at $30 per month, teacher paying board, $5,172,750;
school-books, $86,148 — a total cost to provide for and
instruct for three months the children not now enrolled in
public or private schools, $36,864,648, of which $31,692,898
is necessary before the schools could begin.
"Now, all this done, in addition to what already exists
North and South, the country would be only tolerably supplied with a school plant, the repair and reproduction of
which, with constant increase of investment to perform
properly the increasing educational work, must be provided for.
" But it should be borne in mind that a school of three
months leaves nine months in the year in which to forget
what has been learned in the three. Many schools are far
less in duration, and consist of but a sino^le term during the
year, some not more than three or four weeks, in fact.
These averages are pernicious, inasmuch as it is like an
effort to divide the crime or misery of the country according
to population, and say that each person suffers 25 per cent,
from cancer, or is three-fourths a lunatic, or 50 per cent, a

EDUCATIONAL

BILL

IN

CONGEESS.

317

murderer. But it is the best we can do, and in no event
are we likely fully to grasp the tremendous significance of
the solid facts. The schools, in my opinion, should be six
months yearly, and be divided in Uvo terms. That is
enough ; and the rest of the time of youth should be o-iven
to industrial improvement and recreation.

" The actual yearly expenditures of all moneys for public
schools in the whole country is at this time just about
$80,000,000. I believe that to be a liberal estimate. Of
this, in the sixteen Southern States, with the District of
Columbia, there may l)e $14,000,000. In the year 1881 it
was $13,359,784, as returned to the Commissioner of Education. The schools average about three months yearly.
"If we deduct the $14,000,000 from $80,000,000, we
have remaining, as the expenditure in the rest of the country,
$66,000,000. As these Southern States have one-third the
total population, in order to place that section upon an
equality of privilege with the rest, there should be, instead
of $14,000,000, a yearly expenditure of $33,000,000 for her
enrolled children, and none of these calculations make any
provision for children not enrolled at all.
" It is too low an estimate to say that in the North there
should be an expenditure of $100,000,000 at once to increase
school facilities, provide and qualify teachers for their work,
and at least as much more in the South, or in the whole
country $200,000,000. Upon the present basis of expenditure in the North, there would be $100,000,000 annually
paid for the support of public schools in the whole country.
If one-third of the children are now unenrolled and unprovided for there should be an increase in yearly expenditure
of $50,000,000 on their account. This would make the
annual cost of our public schools only $150,000,000, and
would give to all the children of the whole country but six
months' training each year, and to teachers only the pay
of common laborers or less.
" The proposition of the Senator from Illinois [Mr. Logan]
— setting aside the source of supply from which he proposed
to get the money, which would have a tendency to identify
the support of the public schools with the prosperity of a
business which I hope will yet disappear from the earth,

318

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

which proposition was to appropriate about $80,000,000
yearly to schools — is really moderate when the necessities
of the problem are fairly stated, and I take this occasion to
say that the proposition of the Senator from Illinois, divested
of the objectionable feature referred to, is worthy of a great
statesman and far-seeing patriot. There is nothing the
matter but our own failure to fully appreciate the stern
requirements of the situation.
" If tifty, eighty, or one hundred millions could be substituted for the fifteen millions proposed in this bill, and
the whole distributed upon the basis of population, or of
illiteracy, temporarily, it would be far better. But I have
no hope of the adoption of such a measure, and the committee felt under the necessity of confining the amount to
the comparative pittance of fifteen millions, which must,
necessarily, if not very largely increased, be confined to the
dense clouds of ignorance where explosions are threatened ;
that is to say, it must be applied locally to the evil itself.
In States which receive but little, comparatively little is
wanted.
"Even after $15,000,000 are divided upon the basis of
illiteracy, the individual child will receive for his education
in California, $15.12; in Colorado, $14.34 ; in Connecticut,
$10.71; in Nevada, $14.40; in New Hampshire, $10.07;
in Khode Island, $11.36; in District of Columbia, $13.61;
and in Massachusetts, $19.21.
"While in Alabama he will receive $3.64; in Arkansas,
$3.13; in Florida, $3.75; in Georgia, $4.03; in Kentucky,
$3.67; in Louisiana, $4.96; in Mississippi, $4.09; in Virginia, $3.94; in West Virginia, $4.31; in North Carolina,
$3.26; in South Carolina, $5.05.
" While the immediate need in these last States is, at
least, for double the education called for in the first group.
" This bill appropriates $15,000,000 the first year, and will
give to every State and Territory $3 for each person over
ten years of age who cannot read, and $2.41 for each person
who cannot write, lessening in amount, that is according to
the basis of distribution, $1,000,000 yearly for ten years,
when all payments are to cease.
" The State will apply the

funds

and

render

a yearly

EDUCATIONAL

BILL IX

CONGRESS.

319

account of the manner in which the work is done. The
Executive, if dissatisfied, can withhold further expenditures,
subject to the action of Congress.

'' Each State and Territory must expend for school purposes at least one-third the amount received durins; the first
five years, and an equal amount the second five years of the
operation of the bill if it should become a law.
" States receiving small amounts can expend the same for
normal instruction, teachers' institutes, or otherwise, as they
prefer. The amount that New Hampshire receives, for
instance, would increase her normal-school facilities more
than threefold beyond the present expenditure of the State,
or give 59 cents yearly to persons of school age.
" The funds must be applied to schools and not to structures, not exceeding one-tenth to the qualification of teachers,
which is the first necessity. The States are required to so
use the fund as to bring about an actual equalization of
school advantages to all children alike. Industrial education
is provided for when practical)le, which will be but seldom,
although something may be done in suital^le localities and
in the Avay of beginning.
" "We are a great way deeper in tlie mire than Ave realize
when we talk of doing much in the way of teaching trades
and occupations before our children can half of them find a
chance to learn to read. But it will come in time, and
a beginning can now be made in the way of setting out a few
young trees.
" The Territories are of the utmost importance, and the
bill undertakes to provide for them indispensable legislation,
both in appropriations and administration.
" The method of expenditure in the States is the same,
substantially, which has already been adopted by the Senate
in the passage of the bill establishing a national school fund
from the proceeds of the sale of public lands, etc. As both
parties have already indorsed that method of expenditure on
more than one occasion, the committee, or at least a majority
of its members, have thought best to avoid all chance for
controvers}^ on that subject by adopting that which, having
been repeatedly sanctioned, can not now be repudiated with
consistency.

320

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

" I also embrace this fitting opportunity to say that I fully
believe that the States will everywhere disburse the moneys
received under this bill, if it becomes a law, in good faith,
and with as sacred regard to the demands of prudence and
honor in one section of the country as in the other. For a
year or two there may be some possible confusion in setting
up and testing machinery, but, in the existing condition of
the public mind, the better way is to give outright to the
States and hold them, as they desire to be held, to an
undivided responsibility, to be redeemed upon their honor.
We shall not trust to that honor in vain.
" Mr. President, the absolute necessities of this nation, of
these States, of their darkened present and of the portentous
future, demand the appropriation of public money from a
full Treasury to aid in the establishment and support of
common schools throughout the country.
" Sir, I appeal to the facts, and entreat the Senate to pass
this bill."
Notwithstanding the needy, or, at least, neglected condition
of many of the large Northern cities, where ignorance holds the
balance of power and really controls States, some disposition to
misconstrue the purpose, deny the need, and to misrepresent
the provisions of the measure, has been manifested, in the
North as well as in the South, generallj^ by those, however,
who at heart are opposed to universal education, because it
distributes the soveregnity among the masses of the people,
where it belons^s.
To the Northern people the following views may be specially important ; and one thing is true : this country will grow^
rich and powerful or poor and contemptible together. We
are one people for better or for worse.
The absolute necessity of a homogeneous civilization
throughout the country, which can only exist as the result of
like educational facilities extended to all the people, is an
irresistible argument for national assistance until adequate
school privileges are universal ; in this view the Northern people are intensely interested in the education and elevation of
all parts of the country alike. Cain was his brother's
keeper in spite of himself, and was held responsible for him
with more than his own life ; and if one part of the country,

K^^S*^

Mrs. Sallie F.
SiiperintentLnt of Southern

Chapin,

JForh, Auttional W. C. T. U.

THE

NEW

SOUTH.

321

by reason of more f;ivora1)le conditions in the past, has now
less of illiteracy and more of wealth, it by no means follows
that those who can meanly boast of such advantages have
more of virtue, patriotism, or of desirable brains.
I submit the following views as worthy of the profound
consideration of my countrj^men everywhere, and especially
of our Northern people, whose industries and institutions have
been erected upon a more fortunate model than that after
which society was fashioned where slavery once prevailed.
And we ought to know that old things have now passed away.
It is time that all things were new.
The Avar between the nation and the Southern States was
a conflict between systems of industrial production. One
system secured to the wage-laborer high returns for his toil
and to the individual producer high prices for his commodity.
The other system paid the common laljorer the scant necessaries of life, just enough to create and preserve him as a profitable animal or an efficient machine, while the entire product
as well as the plant of fixed, circulating, and living capital
was owned by the emploj^er.
These two systems collided in Kansas, and the war which
followed abolished the forms of slaverv, retaining much of its
power, because the ignorance which made slavery possible,
with the prejudice against work Avhich grew out of its degradation, was neither removed nor seriously diminished.
]More than twenty years have now elapsed since peace
was restored, during which long period considerable progress
has been made in the South in the diversification of industries
and of production and in the increase of general intelligence.
A corresponding increase of compensation has resulted to all
laboring men, Avhether wage-workers or producers with small
capital of their own, and some advancement has been made.
The wonderful natural resources of the South are now
being constantly bought up by the capital of the Xorth and
of other countries. Already, the Southern market for many
forms of goods once furnished from the North or from
Europe, as well as for agricultural productions and raw materials, isbeing supplied, as it should be, at home. More than
this, the South is already invading the Northern and Northwestern markets, and is competing for trade with production
21

322

THE

TE3IPKRAXCK

MOVEMENT.

of which the highly paid labor and capital of the North is
the chief element.
Foreseeing the inevitable, Northern capital and investments are seeking the South where, with labor of all kinds,
agricultm'al, mechanical, and operative, skilled and unskilled,
upon an average not more than one-half or two-thirds as high,
when paid in actual money or in commodities at cash prices,
as in the North, the profits of their new location will replace
the depreciation and losses which are impending to their
investments at home.
It is safe to predict that within ten years, unless new and
important factors are combined with existing conditions, the
productions of the South, after fully supplying their own, will
compete in Northern markets, with most of the commodities
which now are the chief production of the old free States, at
prices so low as to make it a matter of indifference to Northern labor whether the protective tariff against the products
of " foreign pauper labor " be removed or continued, or even
whether Chinese or foreign contract labor be longer excluded
from our shores.
The farm laborers and operatives of both races in the South
are rg^pidly acquiring the skill required to equal that of corresponding classes at the North, while the facts that women
and children are more generally employed, and that all work
more hours than at the North, enables a given population, if
of equal intelligence and skill, to produce more for a time at
least, than the same number could under the more liberal
treatment of manual workers in the old free-labor States.
The South contains very nearly, perhaps fully, one-half
the natural resources of the whole country, and is certainly
capable of greater rapidity of development during the next
quarter of a century than the North and West. Already she
has more than one-third the entire population of the Union.
Her rate of natural increase is equal to that of the North
with our advantage by reason of emigration, while even this
advantage is passing away as the capabilities of the South
are becoming better known.
The two principal facts to be noted are these : That the
average cash compensation for labor at the South is not more
than one-half or two-thirds the amount paid for the same

THE

NEW

SOUTH.

323

at the North ; and that capital, cognizant of this fact, and of
the superior resources, facilities and capabilities of the South,
is already rushing there from all directions as the most promising field for permanent investment in active production.
Another fact should be comprehended also by the Northern people, and that is the wonderful uprising of the spirit
of thrift, energy and industry observable all over the South.
The traditional Northern conception of the Southern people is not true. A new generation controls that land of surpassing resources and natural advantages. The war destroyed
the old form of patrician and semi-military supremacy which
appealed to arms to prolong its power. But informed as
well as chastened by defeat, the survivors of the struggle
and the generation now upon the stage are full of life and
hope and enterprise, and are eagerly at work to rebuild their
fortunes and restore the power and prestige of their section
of our common country, bj- imitating and, if possible, surpassing all the conditions which enabled the North to triumph
in the mighty conflict. No one can witness this display of
fortitude in adversity and of aggressive courage, when there
was room for despair, Avithout admiration. But all the more
do these facts demand the attention of the North.
Their contemplation can occasion regret only in the breast
of a common enemy of both sections of the country. But
they point with unerring certainty to a coming competition
between the producers of both sections for the home market
in all the common articles of consumption, in comparison with
which that between American labor and the cheap production
of the Old "World is mere fun. The protective tariff, or
absolute prohibition, is the omnipresent and complete defense
of American lalior and capital whenever threatened with
destruction by the commodities of lower civilizations planted
on foreign soils. But here we find a cheaper production by
a laborer with fewer wants than our own, upon which no
tariff can be levied and against which no prohibition can be
raised. On the contrary, every power of the government,
both State and national, is or may be invoked for its development and defense.
In this emergency what shall be done by Northern labor
and by Northern capital?
The question has already been

324

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

answered, and is being answered by the owners of a great
mass of the surplus which those hitherto engaged in the
diversified industries of the North, as we have already seen,
are planting in the South, where future profits may replace
the inevitable losses upon like investments in the North,
resulting from the coming competition.
But how about that capital fixed in plants already in
operation in the North, and which cannot be transferred to
the more favorable conditions of the South, and w^hose owners have no capital to invest elsewhere ? More serious still
is this problem to Northern labor, which must, as a whole,
live or die where it is. Capital can endure delay, may be
transferred elsewhere, or sufier absolute destruction even
before its owner is reduced to the level of necessity which is
all the while occupied by the toiler for his daily bread. The
laborer must have his work every day, for he is hungry three
times every day. So are his wife and their little ones, and
clothino- and shelter are a constant want.
Nothing but dense stupidity can fail to see that the manufacturing capital and cities of New England, and the North
generally, are doomed if they are to compete with the cheap
labor of the South, which is already becoming skillful wath
the hand, although, unfortunately, not fully intelligent in the
discharge of the duties and in the exercise of the powers of
citizenship. This condition comes only with education in the
art of reading and writing, and in the other common branches
of knowledge, thus giving capacity to receive the benefits of
that great instructor and preserver of the life of republics —
the press.
To one who reflects upon the fact that political unity in
a genuine republic depends upon the universal difi'usion of
intelligence among the people, the converse is also apparent,
that so far as unity of political jurisdiction extends, if it is
to be permanent, there must be established throughout that
jurisdiction a high and homogeneous standard of intelligent
thouarht and of moral action. Resultinsj from these conditions will be a uniformity of individual power, which will
enal)le the producer in every path of industr}^ to secure fair
pay for the supply of his wants.
With wise reference to the establishment of this greneral

NORTH

AND

SOUTH.

325

condition of intelligence, and consequently of industrial
independence and equality throughout the country, the
national education bill has been earnestly advocated by those
who have long foreseen what is now so patent, that politicians
and statesmen and patriots are sounding the alarm, and
pressing home upon our people the importance of universal
intelligence and industrial training as the only remedy.
What does this national education bill propose to do?
Not to lessen the development of the South by any means,
but, on the contrary, to increase it. It proposes to make
Southern labor and the Southern masses more intelligent ; to
create among their rapidly multiplying millions of both races
a vast increase of the wants of life, Avhich must be supplied,
so that Southern labor Avill consume, and therefore enjoy, as
well as produce, and thus be obliged to receive in order that
it may purchase as high wages as Northern labor, putting an
end to the competition between the products of the North
and South, and improving both sections by uplifting the
masses of the people all over the country.
Consumption can only increase by increasing the capacity
to enjoy ; that is, by adding to the wants of life by higher
civilization and providins: higher wa^cs or returns for labor
wherewith to purchase the more diversified and costly supply
of the necessaries and comforts of a higher life. Increased
intelligence constitutes that better civilization, and gives the
power which enables its possessor to command his rightful
.share in the production of his labor combined with the capital of the employer. This subject of the general diffusion
of intelligence throuirhout the country is thus seen to be as
important to the North as to the South. It is the only remedy for our threatened Northern industries, except a dissolution of the government and the establishment of ncAV political
relations which will enable the North to apply the principle
of protection against Southern cheap production, the same as
against that of any other foreign power — or a gradual sinking of the pa}' of Northern producers to the lower level of
average Southern compensation for toil.
The schools — common and industrial — with a wise and
conservative organization of labor, are the agencies upon
which we must rely.
I have abiding faith that these great

32G

THK

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

agencies, already in action, will cany on their beneficent
work until the perfect day. But every philanthropist and
patriot should contribute his utmost to stimulate every energy
of the individual, the State, and the nation, to lift all portions of our common country to the level of the highest, that
nowhere shall any recede or fall.
The measure under consideration is still one of the most
important before the country. It must and will be pending
in some form until every child in the country has the opportunity to obtain a good education in the common branches
of knowledo^e, amono; which is that of the nature and effects
of alcohol upon his body and mind. I therefore insert the
following article, carefully prepared in the form of an interview by Prof. Alexander Hogg, of Fort Worth, Texas, and
published in the Boston Globe of August 29, 1887. It is
especially timely as a reply to those who misrepresent the
terms and provisions of the bill itself, and who also deny
the increased or even the continuing necessity of help today, as compared with the condition of the country in 1880.
PROF.

ALEXANDER

HOGG.

*' Prof. Hogg is superintendent of schools at Fort Worth,
and a recognized force in the public movements of the whole
State. He is a Virginian born and a life-long member and worker
in the Democratic party. ' In the cities of Texas,' said he, ' the
schools are as good as they are anywhere. The branches usually
taught in the public schools are as well taught in Texas as they
are in Boston. Of course we have not the fine school-buildings
nor the bricks and mortar that you have, but we have the same
people with the same brains as your people, both as teachers and
pupils. The trouble is in the country. Only some 17 per cent, of
our pupils are in the city schools, while 83 j^er cent, are in the
sparsely settled country,. It is true, we have a large education
fund, but most of it is in lands yet unsold. It will be, when converted into money, a very large fund, but what must the children
of to-day do ?
" ' The cities tax themselves to educate the children. My city
began in 1882 with a tax of five mills to the dollar, and continues
it. Hence, the Fort Worth schools have grown from 600 pupils
:uid 17 teachers to a daily average attendance of 1600 pupils and
43 teachers. I repeat, the city schools do well because they are
well supplied by a very heavy tax. And one-fifth of the entire

.•.:.ii:i;iC.'AX illiti:uacy.

827

fund of Fort Worth goes to tlie colored pupils. We have not in
North Texas, however, so many colored people. The cotton belt?
or south-east, is the portion of the State occuj^ied by the blacks.
But, whether in North or South Texas, the fund is distributed
strictly according to the ratio of the colored to the white pupils.
Fort Worth pays the same to the teachers of the colored pupils as
she does to the teachers of the white. The principal and assistants of the colored schools are all colored. The principal is a
native Texan and a well educated man. We also pay the women
the same salary paid the men for the same service, whether as
principals or assistants.
"'The nation must help us develop this fair and well founded
svstem. I know our senators have voted against the projiosition,
but wherever our peo])le understand the Blair Federal Aid Bill
they are for it, and if it could be discussed before the peoi)le generally they Avould be unanimous in its support. Persons engaged
in educational matters — those acquainted with the bill and the
needs of the schools — favor it. The superintendents of tlie cities
smd the public-school teachers all over the State, Avith the fewest
■exceptions, favor it.
" ' If universal suffrage is based ujton universal education, upon
intelligence, upon the ability of the voter to read the name of liis
choice upon the selected ballot, there is a great, crying necessity
for national relief. It must be given at once. Illiteracy is increasing at a fearful rate, even among the white citizens of Texas.
In 1870 there were only 17,505 illiterate white voters, but in
1880 there were 33,085. Tliere you have the startling increase of
alliteracy among the wliite voting Texans of 90 per cent. The
■colored illiterates numbered 47,235 voters in 1870 and 50,699 in
1880, an increase of 20 ])er cent.
" ' But I am not willing to pass this large increase in illiterate
voters in Texas without explaining how it is that my State should
liave gained in this downward movement so rapidly. Some of
these voters are from old Virginia, some from the Carolinas, from
Georgia, and not a few from Alabama, Mississippi and Louisiana.
This increase in illiteracy in the voting population has not been
confined alone to the States mentioned. The fact is that Avith
the exception of little Delaware the increase in illiterate votei-s in
the South from 1870 to 1880 amounted to 187,671. In this
" downward " race it is a little singular that the white and colored have kept so close together, but it shows that the education
needed is not wholly for " the brother in black."
" ' It may be justly asked why should there be such an incT-ease
in the Avhite illiteracy?
It is simply because these voters are tlie

328

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

sons of the fathers who laid down tlieir lives, sacrificed their allj,
in the unhappy struggle for what they believed to be right.
Their children, daughters as well as sons, were without school
facilities. They really had no time to go to school, but, with
their mothers at home, were struggling for something to eat.
" ' The census of 1880 shows that there are in Kentucky, above
the age of 21, of white women who can not write 22.8 per cent.,,
and in North Carolina there are 33.4 per cent, of w^hite women,
■who can not write. If in the death of these fathers and mothersilliteracy should cease, we shoiild have hope for the republic ; but
upon investigation it will be found that illiteracy is not only increasing but that it is an inheritance that multiplies witli each
succeeding year.
" ' Under the provisions of the Blair bill, were it to become a law,,
Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hami3shire, New Jersey^
New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island and Vermont, with a
population of 12,724,322, would receive $3,099,990, or 24 cents
I)er capita. Texas, with a i3opulation by the same census of only
1,591,749, could receive 12.44 per capita, or ten times as much a&
these great States.
That shows our disadvantage.
"'Little Alabama would receive 17 times as much as those
States. California, Colorado, Illinois, Iowa, Indiana, Kansas,.
Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, Ohio, Wisconsin and
Oregon, with a population of 18,462,723, would receive 14,486,860,
or 24 cents per capita. Georgia, with a population of 1,542,180,,
would receive 16,042,150, or nearly $4 per capita, nearly seventeen)
times as much as all these great States.
" 'Why is this? Simply because Georgia has seventeen times
as much illiteracy as all this vast territory teeming with millions,
of happy people who received their Federal aid in grants of land
from Virginia and the general government for school purposes..
Need more be said upon the " necessity " of this aid ?
" ' Our Southern States are positively doing all they can, and
are doing more proportionately than the favored States of theNorth, more according to their means than the foremost States in.
this Union.
" 'For instance. North Carolina paid school taxes in 1880 upon.
1160,000,000 taxable property. She realized $400,000, $1 toevery $400. Massachusetts paid the same year upon $1,600,000,000, and the school tax amounted to $4,000,000, or $1 to every
$400 of taxable property. That is. North Carolina pays for
school purposes as much ad valorem as Massachusetts, with thisterrible drawback — her poi^ulation being 300,000 more than that
of Massachusetts, and is scattered over seven times the territory

Mi's. Matilda B.

Carse,

President JVoman^s Temperance Publication Association, Chicago,

AMERICAN

ILLITERACY.

329

of Massachusetts. Hence, we lind the schools in North CaroUna
are kept open only about three months each year, while in New
England they are kept closed less than three months.
" ' Now take two American cities : The assessed values of the
city of Charleston in 1860 were 845,000,000 ; in 1880, 821,000,000,
a reduction of more than half, with the obligation to educate
double the number of children. Taxation in the city of Charleston in 1880 was 3^ mills. State, county and city, in all amounting to 861,000 only for school purposes. Boston gives a total of
2-^ mills for all her school enterprises, Charleston solely for primary
instruction. That is, Charleston gives for her schools of lowest
grades nearly half as much again as Boston. Add to this burden
the still greater, viz., Charleston pays a total tax of 2^ cents, while
that of Boston is only 1]. Education is not a matter of sentiment.
" 'The State of New York is worth in taxable property as much
as all the Southern States. These expended on their schools in
1881 813,359,784; in 1881 New York expended 89,936,062.
The total taxable property in New York in 1880 was 82,651,940,000; the Southern States, omitting Missouri, 82,370,923,269, or
New York is richer than the 13 Southern States grouped in the
census tables of 1880.
" ' Now, to the practical question : Can the Southern States,
with less than half the resources of 1860, educate double the number of children then knocking at the door?
"*If they cannot, who should? I answer, the general government. And for this position I appeal to the highest ethical
authority, the duty to do it. It is a well established principle in
ethics that all rights are resolvable into duties. The right of
citizenship carries with it the duty of citizenship. If the State
exercises a right, she assumes a reciprocal duty. The right, therefore conferred by the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments to the
Constitution in enfranchising over 6,000,000 of negroes, the highest and most responsible political privilege, demands of the United
States — tlie power conferring this right — the preparation of
these people to exercise this franchise. Upon this law of ethical
philosophy, and the effect of the franchise already conferred, is
based the duty of the government to make, and at once, full and
ample preparation for the education not only of the voter — the
colored — but for all the enfranchised citizens of this free republic, regardless of color or previous condition.
"'The results of the war, enfranchising the colored man, destroyed at the same time the means of educating the now illiterate
white voter.

330

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

'"After the terrible revolution of 1781, the country, the whole
country, was without money, and Virginia ceded " the great Northwest " to the general government to raise revenues to relieve
the countiy of the disasters of even a successful war. This territory, as then divided up, embraces the great States of Ohio, Illinois, and others rich in taxable values, and boasting of the finest
school systems of our country, the ,dii"ect results of which have
been known as " the sixteen section" fund. That is for the common schools of these rich and powerful States, one thirty-sixth
part of the domain was set apart for the education of all the
children of these States. Should not Virginia, "the mother of
States," demand from these daughters something in her old age
to free her and hers from the dire scourge of illiteracy?
" ' Again, of the proceeds of the public lands, $88,000,000, the
Northern and Western States have received $80,000,000, or ten
times as much as the South. In the distribution of land for the
agricultural colleges, the State of New York received over five
times as much as Texas did, and realized twice as much per acre.
Texas received 87 cents only per acre, California $5, and Minnesota $5.62 per acre.
" ' The Blair bill is constitutional. " To provide not only for the
general welfare," but to " secure the blessings of liberty to oui"selves and to our posterity." Can liberty be preserved when the
ballot is in the hands of a constantly increasing illiterate majority?
If universal suffrage must continue, can we expect " the blessings
of liberty" to be preserved by universal ignorance? Universal
suffrage must rest upon universal education, or Thomas Jefferson's
republic is a failure.
" ' For this distribution of money they tell us there is no precedent. But a precedent is not wanting. These expounders of our
Constitution and readers of our country's history have forgotten
the distribution of the surplus revenue in 1836.
'"All the States receiving their quota of this surplus of 1836
devoted it to educational purposes, and yet we hear there is no
jorecedent for any such aid as the Blair bill proposes.
" ' Still others talk about the " centralization " of- the government extending so far as " to the selection of teachers and textbooks." To
"
aid in the establishment and temporary support of
common schools " is the caption of the Blair bill.
" ' It is not to establish any new system at all, nor to control in
any shape the existing systems,
" ' Then, we hear a great deal about the violence this bill would
do to Jeffersonian Democracy ; but Jefferson was for it, as his
published writings will clearlv prove.

STATESMEN'

OX

THE

EDUCATIOX

BILL.

331

" ' Tliirty-six of our United States senators, tbe chief justice of
the Supreme Court and the attorney-general all say that the powers which Congress already possesses are sufficient for this aj^propriation,
" ' It is often said that the opposition comes from the South and
the Democratic party. If your peoi^le do not know who of the
South favor this measure, ask South Carolinians who Wade
Hampton is; ask North Carolinians who Matt Ransom and ZebuIon Vance are; ask Georgians who xVlfred Colquitt and Joe Brown
are; Mississippians who George and Walthall (and Lamar, who
voted for its passage while a senator), are ; ask Alabamians Avho
James L. Pugh is ; ask Louisiana and Florida and Arkansas of
what politics their senators are.
" ' This is a national question. It is an effort of patriotism to
save our common country.
" 'If universal suffrage must continue, universal education must
be provided, and by a power able to do it — the general government.' "
I deem the Education Bill the most important temperance
measure that can be proposed, not even excepting the National Prohibitor}' Amendment, because if it becomes a law
the amendment will follow in due time with absolute certainty :
mid only increased intelligence among the masses of the people gives any hope of fundamental temperance reform.
For this reason, I will now quote briefly from the speeches
of senators in its advocacy.
SE>rATOR Edmunds, Yermont: " We come, then, to the question as to what we ought to do. We do find, and all agree as
a fact, that in a great many of the States of this Union there is an
xmdue and excessive proportion of people who are ignorant, and
of children who are ignorant, and that in those States it appears
to be a fact that at this present time there are not sufficient resources available to provide from the taxable property of the
inhabitants of those States for this emergency. It is therefore,
xis it seems to me, a case in which the common treasure of all
the people may be fairly devoted in aid of this great and necessary object for the preservation of real republican government."
Senator Evarts, Neio T^ork: "Now, then, in a word, Mr.
President, I confront this immense, this dangerous, this growing,
this threatening mass of ignorance. I find a deliberate, a concerted, a thoughtful, a valuable measure. I am heartily in favor
■of the passage of this bill."

332

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Senator Sherman, Ohio: "I think the safety of the national'
government demands that we should remove this dark cloud of
ignorance that rests upon a j^ortion of the people of the States,
Without reproaches to any section, I am willing, as one of thesenators of Ohio,
to vote from the national treasury a large
sum of money this year, and from time to time, so long as the
necessity exists, a liberal sum of money to aid in the education of
the illiterate children of the Southern and Northern States."
Senator Lamar (^noio Secretary of the Interior)^ Mississippi r
" I have watched it with deep interest and intense solicitude..
In my opinion, it is the first step and the most important step thisgovernment has ever taken in the direction of the solution of what
is called the race problem ; and I believe it will tell more powerfully and decisively upon the future destinies of the colored race
than any measure or ordinance that has yet been adopted in reference to it — more decisively than either the thirteenth, fourteenth;
or fifteenth amendments, unless it is to be considered, as I doconsider it, the logical sequence and the practical continuance
of those amendments. I think that this measure is fraught with
almost unspeakable benefits to the entire population of the Souths
white and black. It will excite a new interest among our people it will stimulate both State and local communities to more energetic exertions and greater sacrifices, because it will encourage
them in their hopes in grappling and struggling with a task
before whose vast proportions they have stood appalled in the
consciousness of the inadequacy of their own resources to meet it."'
Senator Garland, Arkansas {now Attorney- Greneral) : " Thisbill might very aptly be styled a bill to extirpate illiteracy in the
United States. For one, I did not require any amendment to theold Constitution to enable me to find the power of Congress to
do this
In conclusion, I implore both sides, and all sides,.
to come together and vote for this bill, and be a unit upon it, aswe have been talking about it and promising it for years and
years past."
Senator Voorhees, Indiana : " No discussion in this body^
since the war, has been of greater importance, in my judgment^
or will be more fruitful or far-reaching in beneficial results, than
the one now drawing to a close. The measure itself riow before
the Senate has never been surpassed in the elevation and benevolence of its spirit, nor in the magnitude and value of its immediate and ultimate purposes."
Senator Hoar, 3fassachusetts : "I profess to be the friend of
this bill. I undertake to say that the legislature of this nation
has a right to save the life of this nation against whatever

STATESMEN

OX

THE

EDUCATION

BILL.

333

danger. I think it is a better thing to try the experiment whether
by educating a black man he can be made fit for American citizenship, than, without trying that experiment, to cheat him out of
his vote."
Senator Fugh, Alabama: "I do not believe that any measure approaching this in importance has been before the Senate, or
is likely to be before the Senate this session with as much popular
approval of its passage. My service on the Committee on Education and Labor for five months during the last summer and fall
enabled me to learn something of the public necessity. Every
witness examined by the committee upon the condition and needs
of the public schools in the Southern States urged federal aid to
these States, to enable them to extend the benefits of a coramonsehool education to their illiterate children."
Senator Vance, North Carolina : '• I feel that it is my duty
to vote for this bill, and I shall do so."
Senator Brown, Georgia: "As without education the voter,
■without giving him the knowledge
which Gen. Washington
speaks of as indispensable,
he cannot be a citizen, at least
a useful citizen.
He cannot be a voter — a safe, intelligent voter.
I am, therefore, very clearly of the opinion that there
is no constitutional diflSculty in the way of the passage of this
bill."
Senator Jonas, Louisiana: "I accept this bill in behalf of
the people whom I in part represent, as a great benefaction, as a
great assistance to a people overburdened by a charge laid upon
them which they are unable to meet, but which they have every
disposition to carry out to the best of their ability."
Senator Culloim, Illinois: " There is no enemy of the republic
who does not make the public-school system of this country the
point of his attack, either open or insidious, as the case may be;
and there is no friend of the republic who should not do all that
may be in his power to defend and strengthen it."
Senator George, JIississi2)2^i : "Mr. President, I feel very
deeply and very profoundly the gravity and importance of the
measure now before the Senate. I know of no measure likely to
engage the attention of Congress which has so much of benefit to
the people whom I, in part, represent on this floor, and also
to the people of the United States."
Senator Williams, Kentucky : " Mr. President, this is a proposition so manifestly humane and just that it is difiicult for me to
see how any one can withhold his support from it."
Senator Gibson, Louisiana : " In my opinion, reflecting men
in all parts of the countiy
have formed the deliberate

334

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

judgment that the education of the people, the enlightenment of
the suffrage, the elevation of the popular character and the popular conscience, the awakening of a loftier and healthier sentiment
of national patriotism, is absolutely indispensable to the preservation of constitutional liberty."
Senator Ransom, North Carolina : " I will presume to say
that I do not think it possible that any member of the Senate
can be more anxious for the passage of this bill than I am,"
Senator Hasipton, South Carolina : " Actuated by these
motives, I feel bound, as a citizen, as a Senator, as a patriot, to
support the bill under consideration."
Senator Logan, Illinois : " I have been in favor of education
ever since I have been old enough to make the matter a study. I
have always been in favor of common schools and schools of a
high grade, and I am to-day."
Senator Call, Florida : " Mr. President, the measure is far
above all ideas having their origin in partisan bitterness and sectional prejudice. I undertake to say, Mr. President, that
you can not appropriate too much money in this country to education."
Senator Jones, Florida : " I think there is ample authority
in the Constitution for the j)assage of this bill."
Senator Teller, Colorado : " Long ago, on this floor and
elsewhere, I have committed myself unequivocally, unhesitatingly,
unrestrictedly to the power of the general government to contribute out of its great abundance to the suj)port of public schools
anywhere within its jurisdiction."
Senator Jackson, Tennessee : " Mr. President, this measure
may fail, but I esteem it a great personal privilege, as well as a
high patriotic duty, to give it my humble but cordial support."
Senator Mahone, Virginia : " Mr. President, I could not be
more earnestly in favor of the measure which this bill ^^roposes to
inaugurate than I have been and am."
Senator Riddleberger, Virginia: " I am not ashamed to say
here, on behalf of as good a people as inhabit the State of Texas
or of Kansas, that we do want it ; we ask for it ; and we think
that it is due to us to have it."
Senator Dolph, Oregon : " A large amount of illiteracy in any
government is a menace to it. The remedy for such an evil is to
educate."
Senator Miller, ISFeio York : " I am willing to vote enough
of the public money to make such a beginning in this matter that
the Southern States shall be so lifted out of their darkness and
illiteracy that when this $77,000,000 shall have been distributed.

STATESMEN

ON

THE

EDUCATION

BILL.

335

such a public spirit will have been cx-eated in the South that from
that time on tliey will be able to go on with their common-school
system perfected, and carry it to complete perfection, as we have
done at the North."
Senator Harrison, Indiana : " Holding these views, Mr.
President, I am sincerely solicitous that federal aid should be
extended to the States in such a way that the kindly impulses of
that increasing body of Southern men who show a kindly disposition toward the elevation of the colored man shall be recognized
and encouraged."
Senator Blair, New Hampshire: "I also embrace this fittingopportunity to say that I fully believe that the States will everywhere disburse the moneys received under this bill if it becomes
a law in good faith and with as sacred regard to the demands
of prudence and honor in one section of the country as in the
other. For a year or two tlicre may be some possible confusion
in setting up and testing machinery, but in the existing condition
of tlie public mind the better way is to give outright to tlie States
and hold them, as they desire to be held, to an undivided resjjonsibility, to be redeemed upon their honor. We sliall not trust to
that honor in vain. Mr. President, the absolute necessities of
this nation and of these States, of their darkened present and of
their portentous future, demand the appropriation of public
money from a full treasury to aid in tlie establishment and
support of common schools throughout the counti-y. Sir, I
appeal to the facts, and entreat the Senate to pass this bill."
The entire expenditure of the whole country for the support of common schools is now about eighty-five million
dollars, possibly ninety million dollars, yearly ; — less than
one-tenth the direct cost of intoxicating beverages, while of
this amount one-third of the school population residing in
the Southern States received but one-sixth. One-third at
least of these children of the South are never in any school,
because there is none ; and the average length of the schools
which do exist is less than three months during the year.
The Northern States do not expend more than one-half the
money really required to give all their own children the
needed education in the common branches of knowdedge. I
believe that school expenditure should be doubled at the
North, and at least quadrupled in the South. The aid of
the nation can be denied, as it has been hitherto ; but it is

336

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

difficult to comprehend the blindness of those who can thus
willfully wrong posterity, and endanger the foundations of
the republic itself.
The necessity does not depend upon the surplus in the
treasury. If there were no surplus, one should be created by
direct taxation if need be to remove this great danger to our
free institutions. The ostrich is just as good and even a better mark for the hunter as though he did not bury his head in
the sand. To this it may be added that wounds in the head
are generally considered more honorable than those most
likely to be received by cowards and fools. The Women's
Christian Temperance Union has repeatedly endorsed the
measure and has adopted it as one of the great means of
promoting the temperance reform. So also have all the
great labor organizations of the country united in its support. Of what use are laws providing for temperance
instruction in the common schools, if there be no common
schools? As slaver}^ was the common sin, so ignorance is
the common curse of the whole country, and justice requires
that what is for the common good shall be paid for from the
common purse. Certainly this should be done until each
locality is able to bear its share of the burden alone. I
close the discussions of this chapter, omitting much that
should be said, and even important topics, for the want of
space. Education and law are the great remedies. Volumes exist upon each, and I feel how little of real value I
can add to the common stock of knowledge already avail.able.

CHAPTER
"personal

liberty"

XVI.
and public law.

The Right to Fight the Rum Traffic by Legislation — The Objection
urged against Prohibition — The Manufacture and Sale of Liquors in
the Light of "an Inalienable Right" — "Sumptuary Laws" Improperly Defined by Hon. Geo. G. Vest as " Pi'ohibitory Legislation"
— The Right to Oppose the Rum Traffic Argued — No "Personal
Liberty" to Make or Sell Agencies to Produce Crime and Murder —
The Liquor Traffic Considered as a "Business" — Fimdamental Propositions as to Legislation on the Liquor Traffic.

WE

have now, with some hibor, endeavored to ascertain
and illustrate the nature of alcohol, the eifect which
its use has upon the individual man, the family, the local
community, the nation, all nations — society at large. It
must be and it is admitted that alcohol, as a factor in human
affairs, is a tremendous curse, and especially to civilized nations. It confronts us everywhere with its snaky eye and
poison tooth, and everywhere it strikes. What strange fascination has this foul thing, over Christian and heathen alike,
that it should be thus allowed the liberty of the world? Yet
it is to-day an open question, even a great political issue,
whether there should be laws enacted having for their specific object the destruction of the trade in drinks which
intoxicate. "We are told that such laws are violations of
personal liberty; of the freedom for which our fathers
fought and our flag now waves. That "sumptuary laws,"
as the term is used in the political nomenclature of the day,
mean prohibitory legislation — or, as Hon. George G. Vest
expressed the idea in an able speech delivered at Boonville,
Mo., September 29, 1882, largely circulated as a political
document :
" When the Cincinnati platform of the Democratic party,
of which convention I was a member, declared against all
sumptuary laws, that convention had reference to prohibitory legislation
What do you understand to be
^^

337

338

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

the meiining of sumptuary? You understand and I understand that it means smiply and solely prohibitory legislation,
which has been an issue before the American people more or
less since 1851, when the first law was enacted, in the State
of Maine."
Before proceeding, I must call attention to the persistent
error of those who confound laws prohibitory of the liquor
traffic with what are known as " sumptuary laws," Sumptuary laws interfere with the personal conduct of the individual in some matter in which society is not really concerned ;as for instance in regard to what he shall eat, drink
or. wear. But no law has ever yet been proposed, to my
knowledge, and certainly none is now advocated by any one,
which would prohibit the personal use of intoxicating liquor
when that use or its consequences do not injure or endanger
the rights of others. Laws in prohibition of the manufacture and sale of intoxicating drinks are public in their
nature and are enacted for the protection of society against
the ofreat evils of the traffic in strono- drink, and are no
more " sumptuary " than the laws against robbery or murder.
I do not concede that society may not go further than it has
yet gone, and prohibit the personal use of alcohol or any
other poison, or of any substance which injures the bodies
and souls of its members, and thus unfits the man for the
performance of the duties which he owes to society at large.
I onl}^ desire now to point out the injustice and absurdity of
confounding the prohibitory laws of our time, which relate
only to the manufacture and sale for use by others, with
"sumptuary laws," which relate only to the consumer and to
the manner in which he shall apply food, drink, or raiment,
or shelter to his private use. There is no more ridiculous
instance of confused thought and expression in the whole
nomenclature of absurdity. The eagerness of the advocates
of the liquor traffic to transfer to the temperance cause all
the opprobrium possible, whether deserved or not, must
be credited with this gross perversion of phraseology, since
any other explanation is inconsistent with the possession of
ordinary intelligence on their part.
But to proceed.
It must also be conceded by an}^ loo^ical mind that if no law

Mrs. L. M. N. Stevens,
Fresidoit W. C. T. L'., of Maine.

AGITATION

AND

LAW.

339

■which prohibits the traffic should be enacted, because it is an
invasion of the inalienable right of personal liberty, then
laws for the restraint or regulation of the traffic, so far as
they do restrain and regulate, are invasions of the same right,
and are subject to the same objection. There may be taxation for the purpose of revenue, for the object of taxation is
the public good, which includes individual good, and therefore in promotion of the right of personal liberty ; — and all
occupations and propert}^ are subject to taxation upon thi*
principle ; — but when this end is obtained, the right to tax
ceases and sumptuary or prohil)itor\' legislation, being never
for the^;«?;/Jose of raising money for the State but rather torestrain and destroy the traffic itself, which is destruction:
alike of the revenue and of the sources of revenue, whether
it be absolute or only partial, is pro tanto a violation of constitutional personal right. The principle, then, is that there
should be no law to prohibit or fetter the existence of the
traffic in intoxicating beverages, because men have a personal
right to make, sell and use them, just as they make, sell and
use any beneficial commodity.
All political discussion is of the "moral suasion" character. Its object is to convince the judgment and persuade to action, for the enactment and enforcement, or
for the repeal or modification, of some laiv. The lawmaking power is to decide and to act upon the right or the
wrong of the thing in issue, for law is a "rule of action,
prescribed by the supreme power of the State, commanding
what is right and prohibiting Avhat is wrong." If, then,
"sumptuary" or prohibitory or restrictive laws are all wrong
in themselves, it can not be right to agitate, that is, to use the
forces of the pulpit, the rostrum and the press, and of personal influence, to secure their enactment. It can not be
right to agitate to secure that which is wrong. It will be
admitted that the onl}^ justification of any law is its tendency
to promote the puldic good, which includes that of individuals, the aggregation of whom constitutes the public. It is
not right to endeavor to create a general public sentiment
or public opinion, which is the strongest of all laws, whether
put into statutory form or not, and which will of itself destroy this traffic, if it becomes strong enough, without any

340

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

formal legislation, unless it is also right to ask that the
result of the agitation be made into law when that law would
embody the public will. The unanimous State has no more a
moral right to seize upon and destroy the inalienable right
to make, sell and use intoxicating liquor than has a single
member of the State. Inalienable rights — life, liberty unless
forfeited — can not be taken away by any but tyrannical
power. Neither can property, without compensation, and
then only for the public good. But this really does not
take away value — it only changes its form. It is, then,
clear that the right to endeavor to create a public sentiment,
as w^ell as to enact public sentiment into law, is denied to
those in all countries w^ho endeavor to prohibit or restrain
the traffic in alcoholic drinks. It becomes necessary, then,
for us to decide whether this claim be well founded, for it
goes to the full extent of denying the right to oppose the
liquor traffic at all, just as it would be wrong to endeavor
to restrain or prohibit men from engaging in agriculture
or commerce, and in consuming the product of common
human industries.
If there be a right of personal liberty to use alcoholic
liquors as a beverage, against the will and to the injury of
the public, there is the same liberty to manufacture and sell
in order that it may be exercised without prohibition, either
total or partial, and moral opposition is as much wrong as
resistance by formal laws.
We are now, then, confronted with the broad and fundamental questions : Is the traffic in intoxicating liquors one
to which individuals in their private capacity or in their
social relations, or their civil and political relations, ought to
make opposition, either moral or legal, or in both these
ways? Have individuals, has society or the State, the right
to oppose the traffic in intoxicating beverages by moral
effort or by positive law ? If that traffic may be opposed in
either way, it may be opposed in both.
OUGHT

IT TO BE OPPOSED

IN EITHER ?

It is a radical question ; for if the answer be in the affirmative, then the extent of that opposition must be carried to the
full length of the logic which justifies any interference at all.

RUM

TRAFFIC

A

SUBJECT

FOR

LEGISLATIOX.

341

If any opposition to the freedom of the trade is right,
there are certain reasons why that opposition is right, and
but for which that opposition would be wrong. If that
opposition for those reasons and for the attainment of certain purposes be required at all, then, it should continue
until those reasons cease longer to exist, by reason of the
accomplishment of the desired ends.
What is the traffic, and whose interests are concerned in
it? Obviously, those whose interests are concerned have the
right to participate in its control. Xo man liveth to himself, no one nation more than any one man. AMiose interests and what interests are concerned in this traffic, and m
what way are those interests affected? Is there any traffic
which more universally and vitally concerns every unit, and
at the same time the mass of the human race? Is there
any traffic which more seriousl}^ affects every interest of this
world and of the world which is to come ? "What traffic so
concerns the personal fate of him who partakes in it? AVhat
traffic so domimates the family — })arental, filial, fraternal
and conjugal relations? Does not the traffic concern the
citizen in his personal fitness for the discharge of the duties
which devolve upon him, and in the discharge of those
duties by others who have equal powers and like duties with
himself? What traffic so clutches at the vitality of the State
and of nations, and thus controls the very sources of production, both of property and of population, of enterprise, happiness and power? What traffic so involves all the interests
of the whole world? It is in fact a traffic which concerns
everybody who exists or will exist on the face of the earth
through the whole course of time, until it and its consequences shall cease, which will be either by the destruction
of the traffic by the race or the destruction of the race by
the traffic. It is hardly too grave a statement to say that
the question of that result is likely to be determined b}^ the
struggle in which we are noAv engaged. That struggle can
not successfully continue if it is not right to continue it.
Sooner or later mankind will determine the question of
right, and then the struggle will cease by the assertion of
that conviction with irresistible force, and if personal li])erty
implies freedom of the poison trade, then personal liberty

342

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

is to be vindicated by the destruction of the race, for whose
happiness personal liberty is supposed to exist.
If Ave consider the parties concerned in the traffic as a
mere business, we have first the maker, and second the
consumer.
Now, what has a man the natural right to mahe ? Has
he a right to make anything and everything which mortal
ingenuity and skill and exertion can produce? Absolute
personal liberty will give him that natural right. May he,
then, dig a pit for his neighbor? May he build a fire, on
his own land if you please, so as to destroy his own father
and mother or great tenements crowded with the numerous
and helpless families of the poor? Can he manufacture
powder and dynamite in crowded cities? Can he store
them under theatres and churches or even palaces? Can
he manufacture these or many other things for any but useful purposes? Can he do so at all, notwithstanding his
sacred right of " personal liberty," wherever the exercise
of his vocation results in a product or an action wholly or
even partially inimical to mankind? Can he produce things,
serviceable and necessary in themselves when applied to
beneficial uses, without, at the same time, submitting to the
absolute prohibition of their production for hurtful ends?
Is there an unlimited rio-ht to create facilities for clestruction? Has any man personal liberty to poison the air?
Has he any more the right to manufiicture any poison,
whether in one form or another, which, like the corrupted
air and like the plagues of Pandora's box, once out, will go
everywhere and destroy every green thing? Does personal
liberty extend to the making or doing of all this ? If not,
why not? There can be no reason for the restraint, except
that the exercise of personal liberty which inflicts evil upon
others is morally wrong and therefore is legally prohibited.
But if he can not thus make, how can he sell or distribute
though freely, without price, that which will injure another
or that which is, even when designed for a good use, liable or
likely to be applied to the injury of another? Is there, or
should there be, personal liberty, in this or any other country,
to make or to sell (which is a part of the making) powder
and dynamite and arsenic, strychnine, aconite and prussic

ALCOHOL

A

DESTROYER.

343

acid, for any but uses which are beneficial to society? Is
there even the liberty b}' law to create these dangerous
agencies without legal supervision and watchfulness, that
they be applied only to the beneficial use? Can you sell
them, or can you give them away, without responsibility,
which is regulated by law? Are any of these intrinsically more dangerous to individuals or to society than
alcohol? Nay, will not every man instinctively avoid them
if he knows of their nature or apprehends their dangerous
use? But who of its victims avoids alcohol? It charms
like the adder, and holds its victim fast with its <rlittering eye. Now, what is alcohol, and how does it seize
and hold its prey? Alcohol is a substance which has an
affinity for the soul as well as for the body. It is an
invisible spirit as well as a physical thing. Shakespeare has
well called it ''devil." It enters at the lip and is at once in
the brain, burning, raging, destroying. By some horrible
alchemy, some inscrutal>le, mysterious and awful demonism of affinity, it interpenetrates and possesses the whole
threefold nature of man, and recreates him into the image of
hell. While its kingdom lasts, it is of the infernal world.
What there is in the strange compound called man which
yields at once to the dictates of this spiritual and pln'sical
poison, Ave cannot tell, liut alcohol can conquer every
human organism. It mounts to the brain. It captures the
citadel of thought. Reason hath no power over it. It
delights while it destroys. It becomes a second nature.
It creates a desire for continuous use which is as imperious
and often as unconquerable as the appetite for food. The
man becomes possessed. The brain, the stomach, the blood,
the tissues, everything craves, with unutterable, unappeasable longings, more poison, more delirium, more death.
Once fully formed, this appetite becomes permanent. It
descends with the blood and murders in the third and fourth
generation. The hereditary taint is developed and re-enforced in the child b}^ continued use, deepening as it descends ; and thus the evil, which might be eliminated by
abstinence, is continually growing wider and deadlier from
generation to generation, so long as the supph^ comes to the
increasinirlv voracious demand.
What acohol inflicts others

344

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

may tell, — of madness, idiocy, starvation, crime, death, —
but we have the character of the agency in this summary of
qualities. Alcohol enslaves the mind and the body so long
as the fit of intoxication lasts. Its use creates an appetite,
unnatural to be sure, but no less unappeasable than hunger
for healthy food. It demands its supply as much as the
natural wants of both body and mind. Thus, with use,
intoxication becomes perpetual, and even in what appear
to be the most sober and normal conditions of the man, he is
in a state of chronic unsoundness, which unfits him for the
graver tests and duties of life, while he steadily gravitates in
a geometrical ratio to final destruction. As the process goes
on, the will becomes extinct. Will is freedom ; its absence,
slavery. Eeason in itself has no power to resist desire.
Desire grows strong as the will grows weak, and another
will is evolved, which wars for the supremacy of the soul.
It finally subjects the whole man, and the new condition
becomes the foundation of a great industry now protected by
the laws of the land, the direct efiect of which is the suicide
of human nature.
The evil, then, of alcoholic intemperance is caused by the
existence of a pernicious industry which is based upon the
demand for the hurtful use of intoxicating spirits. What are
the remedies for this state of things? Obviously, the evil
could not continue if the creation of alcohol should cease ;
but alcohol would not be manufactured if there were no
demand for it. There would be no hurtful use but for the
appetite which the improper use has created. But the unfortunate practices of the past have produced the appetite, until
it is as much a fact as any other fact in the conditions of
civilized life.
Is it right that personal liberty be exercised to create an
agency like this for the express purpose of being sold or
given away, and thus destroying mankind? If so, there is
"personal liberty" to commit every crime, and murder is a
legitimate occupation.
Between the manufacturer and the consumer are the middlemen, who purchase in quantity, transport and accomplish
the retail sale. Shall they exercise this same God-given
" personal liberty " to traffic in the fatal commodity that it

" PERSONAL

LIBERTY " OF CONSUMER.

345'

may he applied to its fatal use? Certainly if the right exists
to make, it exists to sell. AVe do but trifle when we haggle
over the sale of that which we permit to be made, and which
is worthless unless it be sold. It can not be right to permit
the manufacture of that which it is a wrong to apply to the
very use for which it was right that it should be made. Out
upon all such sophistry ! The maker is the great criminal,
or there is none. Lay the ax at the root of the tree. Attack
the maker as well as the seller, and with still sturdier blows
hew to the conscience of socict}', and destroy the greatest
criminal of all.
Now we come to the consumer. Has he personal liberty
to consume? Has he the right to poison himself? Has he
the moral right? The sane suicide is, by all the laws of God
and man, a murderer. If successful, he escapes the penalty
of human laws, but renders an account elsewhere. If he
survives the attempt, he is, by the common law, subject to
the penalties of those Avho unlawfully, but unsuccessfully
assail the life of their fellow-men. If the liquor traffic be
wrong, it is because it does hurt. That hurt is done by reason
of the consumption, and but for the consumption the manufacture would cease. There is no escape from the conclusion,
then. If the consumer, having still self-control to that extent
which involves moral responsibility, consumes alcohol to his
hurt, he is a wrong-doer. The sane suicide, if there be one,
commits a wrong. He has duties and responsibilities to
society and in his relations to his Creator ; it is also a violation
of his duty not to stay in the world all the days of his appointed time, until his change come, in the attempt to discharge the obligations of life, from which he can not escape.
So the consumer of alcohol who does so to the injury of his
power to perform those duties (and I believe that any indulgence which is not medicinal is injurious) does a moral
wrong, a wrong to others, so fjir as he does a personal injury
to himself; for such personal injury deprives both himself
and others of that affirmative exercise of his powers for
good which is demanded by his duty to God, society and
himself.

346

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

CRIMES

VICES.

AND

I am aware of the distinction drawn between crimes and
vices. Crimes are offenses against the rights, either of person or property, which belong to others, and society pmiishes
crimes by law. A vice is a wrong personal practice, which
is supposed not directly to injure the public, or which society
has not yet by legislation placed in the categorj^ of crimes.
But of any vice which injures society, society may at any
time take jurisdiction as a crime, and there is no vice which
injures only the individual. In the nature of things, as
society is made up of individuals, whatever hurts one of its
members injures the whole ; and, if the evil be flagrant, the
self-infliction, which, while responsibility lasts, is the only
form in which a vicious practice exists at all, — for every
man does his own drinking, — is no excuse, any more than
attempted self-destruction is an excuse from the consequences
of an attempt to kill. Hence it is the duty of society to
prohibit and to punish vices which have become a serious
€vil. A serious evil can not be confined to him who commits
it. A man has no right wantonly to burn his own house, to
maim himself, to pursue a course which will surely destroy
his person or his property, dethrone reason, deprive those of
his active help who are entitled to it, or which will cast him
a helpless burden upon others who are in personal relations
to him, or a wreck upon society at large. The law, in
most cases, does prohibit any such falsely so-called " personal
liberty" as this, and I believe should prohibit and punish
the otherwise than medicinal use of intoxicating liquors by
the consumer himself. If there be no public sentiment now
which will enact and enforce such a law, then, agitation should
continue until the question be settled whether or not the
practice of intoxication be right or wrong, even though it be
concealed from the public gaze. When that question is settled, principles already determined upon and adopted in other
cases will dispose of this, in regard to the prohibition of the
use by the consumer. I always contend, however, for the
logical result of the premises I lay down, or I abandon
the premises. The present agitation seeks no prohibition by
law of any consumption by the individual which does not

LIQUOR

TEAFFIC

AS

A

"BUSINESS."

347

lead him to disturb the public peace. There will be a time
when the consumer to his own serious injury will be punished
by law.
If alcohol be a medicine, its use as such should be free,
subject only to such regulations as will secure its safe administration, asin case of any poison; but any other use
within the human system is wrong, and should be prohibited.
This is no supervision of the mind, no interference with
freedom of thought. It is only the assertion of the well
settled principle of law, that a man shall not intelligently
inflict upon himself a wrong which is from its very nature an
injury to society, and which for that reason he may not inflict
upon others.
But let us examine the nature of this traflSc, as a business
transaction, more closehj.
What is the work of the manufacturer? He withdraws
capital, Avhich is the product of human toil, from investment
in useful enterprises, and employs it in a business which
destroys humanit}'. He seizes upon human food, fresh from
the hand of beneficent Nature, and converts it into an active
poison, which generates disease and invades the citadel of life.
He applies the la1)or of man, Avhich should be directed to the
production of things of use and beauty, to that which deforms
and destroj's. He invokes, and he receives, the protection
of the laws and institutions of society for himself and his
famil}^ and his property. He produces in return that which
eviscerates the very life of the body politic ; fills the land
with pests; the asylums, the hospitals and the penitentiaries
with occupants, and builds nine out of every ten gibbets
where murderers expiate their crimes. Society, which protects him and his business, thus inflicts upon itself more misery than it suflfers from pestilence, fomine and war. Society
is guiltier far than the maker and dealer, who has at least the
environment of business, the inducement of trade, the necessity of support for himself and of those dependent upon him,
and an occupation which constitutions and laws have protected from time immemorial, to l)lunt his moral sensibilities,
or to induce him to continue in the profitable entanglements
which an aroused conscience is not quite strong enough to
break.
Society has no such excuse.
Society gives all, and

348

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

receives in return this stone, or serpent, which is worse than
the stone.
Look further, too, at the consumer. He pays his money,
the product of legitimate industry, for the product of the
still ; a valuable consideration for that which satisfieth not,
and which curses with an unconquerable desire for more and
more of that which was all shames and crimes in the beofinnins;.
What does alcohol to the husband ? It converts him into
a brute for life, and turns death into a blessing.
What does alcohol to the wife? It converts her into a
maudlin fiend, a sot, an outcast, and shames the earth with
a species of fallen angel, for which hell has no rival.
What does alcohol to them both ? It turns parentage into
a crime, and young life into inherited misery and debasement ;loads childhood with burdens which maturity can not
bear ; blasts existence with shame and want, sickness and
despair ; transmits crime and idiocy, insanity, disease, pain
and perchance (by good-fortune) death.
What does alcohol to the child? It blasts the fond hope
and high promise with which life began ; crushes out the
mother's soul, and brings down the gray hairs of the once
proud father in sorrow to the grave. Thus, in its turn,
childhood curses parentage, and all the affections of human
nature bring forth the ashes of despair.
And so it is that, in every possible aspect in which we can
contemplate this traffic in alcohol as a beverage, we find it to
be evil, utterly evil. If there be any other thing which is
under the control of man, or to the influence of which he is
subjected, whether or not it be under his control, from which
he suffers so much, as an individual and in his social and
his larger relations, what is it? If there be anything to
which he may oppose his heart, his thought, his tongue, his
pen, his hand, and all the organized forces of the State, what
is it, if it be not the traffic in alcohol ? Think over the whole
category of things which blast and destroy mankind, and
name the curse so universal and so threatening as this
octopus, with his deadly tentacles glued upon the homes
and the bleeding hearts of all Christendom — upon every
continent — and whose choicest prey is the most highly
developed and civilized of the race.

^/

Miss JtUia

Coleman,

Supennte?idcnt of Literature, A^itiotial W. C. T. U.

FUNDAMENTAL

PROPOSITIONS.

349

It seems an absurdity to claim that such an evil is beyond
and above moral and legal restraint. We have already seen
that, if subject to either, and the necessity require, it must
be subject to both. I shall venture to assume that the constant warfare of the last hundred years for the rescue of men
from this infinite curse has not been attempted tyranny on
the part of those who waged it ; that " personal liberty " has
not been violated by all these gigantic efforts of the greatest
and tenderest and the best, to promote the happiness of
others by all the energies of personal love, of enlarged philanthropy, ofthe church and of the State ; that the mighty
noise of the battle to-day is not all for the destruction of our
liberties, but rather for their preservation, and for the salvation of our homes and of our country, and for the happiness
of mankind.
I close this chapter with certain propositions which I
believe to be true. They were advanced by me on an occasion now long past. They have been subjected to at least
the opportunity of critical examination, Avhich I know they
have received on the part of those who are interested to disprove them; for if they be true propositions, then, "their
craft is in danger." They have never yet been confuted,
nor, so far as I know, even assailed.
These propositions cover the case, and if they are not
true they ought to be confuted, for many believe them, and
will act upon them until they be either disproved or be
enforced by all the powers of moral suasion and of public
law.
FUNDAMENTAL

PROPOSITIONS.

In order to justify legislation of any kind restricting the
manufacture and use of alcoholic liquors, I believe it to be
necessary to maintain these propositions :
First. That it is the duty of society, through the agency
of government, which is the creature of society, to enact and
enforce all laws which, Avhile protecting the individual in the
full possession and enjoyment of his inalienable rights, tend
to promote the general welfare, and especiall}'' whenever
that welfare is impaired or threatened by any existing or
impending evil it is the duty of society to enact and enforce

350

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

laws to restrict or destroy that evil. It may be proper to
observe that no law can promote the general welfare which
deprives an individual of an inalienable riglit, when that
riffht is properly defined, or which impairs the enjoyment
thereof, whether of life, liberty, property, or the pursuit of
happiness. But society has inalienable rights as well as
individuals, and the right to such legislation as will promote
the general welfare, in its true sense, is one of them ; and
the inalienable rights of individuals and the inalienable
rights of society at large are limited by, and must be construed and enjoyed with reference to each other.
Second. Wliile society has no right to prevent or restrict
the use of an article by mdividuals for purposes which are
beneficial only, yet if that use, beneficial to some, is found
by experience to be naturally and inevitably greatly injurious in its eflects upon others and upon society in general,
then it becomes the duty of society, in the exercise of its
inalienable right, to promote the general welfare, and, in
self-defense to social life, just as the individual may defend
his natural life, to prohibit, regulate or restrict the use of
that article, as the case may require. This principle is
daily applied in laws which control the manufacture and
use of gunpowder, nitro-glycerine, dynamite, and other
things of great and dangerous potency, the unrestrained use
of which, even for useful purposes, has been shown by
experience to be destructive to the inalienable rights of
others. This results from the common principle of law that
every man must so enjoy his own rights as neither to
destroy or impair those of another, and it is the great end
for which government is instituted among men to compel
him so to do.
Third. No person has a right to do that to himself which
impairs or perverts his own powers ; and when he does so
by means of that which society can reach and remove by
law, to such extent as to become a burden or a source of
danger to others, either by his example or by his liability to
commit acts of crime, or to be essentially incapacitated to
discharge his duties to himself, his family and society, the
law — that is, society — should protect both him and itself.
A man has no more right to destroy his inalienable rights

FUNDAMENTAL

PROPOSITIONS.

351

than those of another, or than another has to deprive him
of his own. The laws restraining the spendthrift in the
destruction of his inalienable right in property, and punishing suicide (as the common law did, by forfeiture of
estate, etc.) or attempted self-murder (as the law does now),
are familiar examples of the application of this principle .
These are elementary principles of law and of commonsense. They are corner-stones of all just government. To
these principles every member of society is held to have
given his assent. The}^ are unquestioned, so far as I know,
by any one Mho believes in any law. They are axiomatic,
and indestructible as the social organization itself.
Fourth. The use (unless medicinally) of alcoholic liquors
to the extent of intoxication or poisoning — which, as will
hereafter be seen, is the same thing as intoxication — is
an injury to the individual ; it inflicts great evils upon
society at large ; it is destructive to the general welfare ; it
is of a nature which may be greatly restricted if not destroyed by the enforcement of appropriate laws. Consequently such laws should l)e enacted and enforced; and this
should be done in our country, cither by the States or by
the general government, or by hotJi, if such laws can be
made more efficient thereby. If these propositions be true,
I believe that the facts in the controversy between man and
alcohol unquestionably bring the traffic under the jurisdiction of prohibitory law.
If these propositions be not true, then, society is without
cement and government is rank usurpation.

CHAPTER
UNDER

WHICH

LAW,

XVII.

LICENSE

OR

PROHIBITION?

The Principles Underlying the License Idea Discussed — Prohibition
under a Chinese Emperor, Four Thousand Years Ago — New York
City under License Mapped and Studied as a City of Saloons — The
Relative Merits of License and Prohibition as Means of Restriction —
"Prohibition Does not Prohibit," an Absurdity — Gov. Dingley's Testimony— New Hampshire and Vermont.

ASSUMING, from the preceding facts and discussion,
that opposition to the liquor traffic by the individual
and society is obedience to the first law of nature, which is
the exercise of the great right of self-defense, it becomes a
vital matter to determine in what way and by what methods
that right shall be exercised. It is obvious that it must be
done either by persuasion or by force, or by their combination. The conduct of the producer and of the consumer
must be controlled by their own will voluntarily yielding to
the right, or by the will of others. No human power has the
right to force the will of the individual when on the defensive, save the State. If the liquor traffic existed only by
mere sufierance, and not by legal recognition and under the
protection of the State, the law of self-defense would justify
individuals and communities in the use of so much force as
should be found necessary to destroy it without resort to
legal measures. But it now exists under the protection of
law. It will not yield to persuasion. If, then, it is to be
removed, force must be applied by the sovereign power
under the direction of the sovereign will. That will is the
law ; and if its existing expression protects the traffic, it must
be changed to secure the reo^ulation or the destruction of the
traffic.
The law must permit absolutely without restraint of the
trade — as in case of any useful occupation ; or it must regulate and restrict, which implies that the trade is more or less
dangerous to society ; or it must prohibit absolutely, which
352

THE

LICENSE

IDEA.

353

implies that the traffic is bad in itself or so dangerous to
society, or both so bad and dangerous, that the public good
requires its outlawry and extinction.
A tax or duty upon the occupation does not assume the
existence of any evil in that occupation. The power of
taxation may be exercised upon any trade whatever in the
discretion of the sovereign power ; that of the teacher, the
clergyman and the husbandman or the lawyer, as well as of
the dealer in strong drink. So a tax may be levied upon
any production whatever ; as cloth, tobacco, sugar or salt.
Nothing against the occupation or product is implied by the
imposition of a mere tax.
A license fee may stand upon diiferent ground, and may
be imposed either for the sake of revenue or for restraint, or
with both ends in view. If by law the license be free to
every one who will pay the license fee, and it be conceded
that the occupation and the product are useful and not hurtful to society, then, the license fee is only another form of
taxation, and should be uniform and impartial in its operation ; otherwise, it becomes tyranny. If the law goes
further and imposes conditions to restrain, to regulate and
curb the industry by imposing an excessive or burdensome
charge, or by restricting its exercise to a favored few, or in
other ways designed to restrain the production or the occupation, itis then not a tax, but a prohi])ition, so far as it
goes, and can only be justified upon the ground that the
traffic is a public evil, and the degree of prohibition, whether
absolute or partial, is to be determined wholly by the extent
of the evil and the degree to which the public good requires
its restraint. So that a restrictive license law stands upon the
same principle as absolute prohibition. Whoever concedes the
principle of the high or low license law, the law which is not
enacted purely and only for the sake of revenue, has given
up the " personal liberty " shibboleth, and stands upon the
same ground of princijjJe as the most fanatical prohibitionist.
The argument between them has ceased by a surrender to the
principle of the prohibitionist, and all further discussion is
confined to the question of the degree of culpability on the
part of the traffic and the demands of the public welfare.
Whoever holds to the position that there should be no
23

354

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

" sumptuary laws " is for " free rum." Thus wide is the gulf
between the theories and platforms of those who are for
" prohibition " and those who are against it. There is no
middle ground of principle. Liquor dealers' associations,
which, under the pressure of outraged and aroused pubhc
conscience, endeavor to protect their craft by the open or
secret advocacy of any form of license laws, have no principle or logic remaining upon which to base their action.
Admitting their trade to be an evil, they must prove that the
license law is better for the public than the prohibitory law
when faithfully enforced and loitJi their own co-operation.
It is no reply to say that the prohibitory law can not be sa
well enforced as the law of license ; for nothing but their
own opposition ever has stood, or ever will stand, in the way
of such enforcement. Therefore, the question is between
the relative good resulting from absolute prohibition of the
use of alcoholic beverages and their use under a license law,
which is absolutely no practical prohibition, except as pecuniary and other mere transient difficulties are put in the way,
like the grass thrown at the boy w^hom the " old man found
in his apple-tree, stealing apples."
When, therefore, the traffic asks or consents to a license
law, whether high or low, it must be plainly understood that
its motive is to secure an enactment under wdiich, by fraud
and evasion, more of that absolute freedom w-hich it is en~
titled to under the anti-prohibitory theory is attainable than
can be secured with the same effort by fraud and evasion to
escape from the meshes of absolute prohibition. In other
words, it is seeking free rum under license, because license is
less hurtful to the trade than prohibition.
Whoever supports a license law assists, however unintentionally, to secure that end. I admit that a highly restrictive
license law may be executed, although it seldom is, for a
short time beneficially ; but invariably it soon degenerates
into freedom, and the quantity consumed is seldom diminished for the time being even, and soon it is increased.
If public sentiment should continue active against the
traffic, it inevitably passes on into prohibition. If public
sentiment sinks and recedes, license becomes no law at
all.

Invariably the holder of the license violates its con-

PROHIBITION

OR

LICENSE.

355

ditions, and thereby incurs the penalty of the law, so that
danger to himself compels him to permit the sale by his
neighbor who has no license at all. The great pretended
advantage of his co-operation with the community in the enforcement of the law disappears, and we have " free rum."
Certainly, there can be no more freedom under the prohibitory than under the license law, when neither is enforced rand if the traffic be intrinsically right, why enact prohibition, either total or partial, in the form of license or of absolute denial?
It is better to have a good law partially executed than a'.
bad law Avhich seems to sanction the evil, and which will be
no better executed than the good one. God put prohibition
into the ten commandments ; certainly they are not fully enforced. Yet He never has repealed them. It is safe to follow His plan of legislation. The non-enforcement of a good
law is a strange reason for its repeal ; that is to say, if there
be an evil which requires the aid of law — the interference
of the government — for its extinction, the law being provided and failing of execution because of the continued existence and strength of the evil, the law should be rejiealed in
order that the evil may still more increase !
If it be a bad public example to neglect the enforcement
of needed law, what are we to say of that public " exam])le "
which succum])s to the evil by withdrawing all protest and
confessing the subjugation of the government itself to its
power. If the prohibitory law exists, it will be the more
effective whenever Avanted, and is the more easily enforced
when any law can be enforced. But the license law is frequently advocated l)y the enemies of prohibition from a purely
business motive. Wealth is glad to remove the small dealer
by the imposition of a heavy fee and then to al)Sorb the
profits of the whole trade to itself. Monopoly is after every
dollar there is on earth. It is forever the big fish swallowing the little one. But why should the rich man be allowed
his gilded saloon, when the poor man is denied his slum?
The man who patronizes the former will become the pest
who supports the latter. Is wealth to be used to destroy its
possessor? Such a doctrine justifies suicide ! Why should
not the wretch be permitted to commit hari kari in a hovel »

356

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

as well as the dude and the gentleman surrounded by syrens
and magnificence ? There is no argument for license which
is not an argument for absolute " personal liberty " — for the
totally unrestricted traffic.
A restriction hy license or tax is no greater impediment,
certainly, than absolute prohibition and the infliction of the
penalties and disgrace of crime. If prohibition fails wholly
or partially, then must license, high or low, or taxation in
any disguise, which is permission whatever form it takes,
fail still more and worse. There never yet was in any community the necessary public opinion to enforce a license law,
which would not accomplish more to remove the curse if
operating to administer a prohibitory law. No prohibitory
law was ever weakened or repealed, and no license law was
ever substituted for prohibition, for the purpose of suppressing the evils of intemperance. The motives, the interests
and the influences which oppose the enactment of prohibitory
legislation are always identified with the rum power. Indeed,
the staple argument for license is that thereby a strong interest is created which, in self-defense and to promote its
own increase and profits, Avill aid to enforce the law against
others who seek to engage in the same nefarious business.
But how delusive is even this pretense. Who ever knew
of a licensed liquor saloon being conducted, except temporarily, without constant violation of the restrictions in the
law under which it existed, and the incurrence of liability to
its penalties ? How long does the licensee continue in that
innocence without which he dares not accuse the dealer who
sells without any license, at his side, in defiance of all law
whatever? A "nuisance" he may aid to suppress, for that
hurts his trade by arousing the indignation of the community, — but he never moves on the enemy's works from any
other motive, and seldom from even that. With slight and
temporary exceptions, a license law is no law at all. There
is no practical difference in the end, and the degree oi prohibition which there is in the license law is all that does any
good.
The only good ultimate eflfect of a license law is to
demonstrate its own utter worth lessness, and thus to contribute by experience, which is the great teacher, to the evolu-

Tlie Late John B. Finch.

THE

STATE

AND

LICENSE.

357

tion of the law of perfect prohibition. We approach the
light very slowly. The so-called prohibitory laws, so far as
they have failed, have done so because they were partially, in
effect, license laws themselves, and the}'- always will be so
until that part of the trade hitherto untouched and unrestrained isbrought under jurisdiction : to wit, the manufacture, the transportation and the importation, which are now
protected by national power.
The national protection to the liquor traffic is the true
reason of the failure of State prohibitory laws, so far as
they have been inefficient. As well may a single county
expect to fully enforce prohil^ition while adverse laws and
a hostile public opinion surround it. As the homely proverl:)
says : " The fault is in the finder." Our present system of
prohibition is at best nothing more than an attempt at local
option by States, and is subject to all the inherent weakness
which exists in such movements in the several States. Far
better than nothing ; but we must reach the manufacture
and the importation and the transportation by national
power.
The effect of the imposition of a license fee is, in itself
alone, perhaps calculated to restrict the num])er of those
who engage in the traffic, and also to give the public a share
in the proceeds of the sale. But, in practice, it is all
collected from the public, either by an increase of the price
or by the dilution or adulteration of the drink. On the
other hand, it blunts the public conscience ; it sinks the
State to the level of the partaker, which is the level of
the thief; while the gain to the public coffers is that of the
man who in a conflagration should rescue his dog but lose
his family. The tremendous account for burdens upon
society, and even those imposed directly upon the State for
pauperism, crime, insanity and charity, sustained by taxation, loss of production and immense taxable values which
Avould exist but for the traffic, arouse our hot indignation
and scorn when the trifling revenues from it are suggested
as any palliation or compensation for such dire calamities.
Whenever it is apparent that the collection of a tax upon
some occupation or commodity is required to defray the
public expenses, there are many reasons why this traffic

358

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

should be selected to bear the imposition, perhaps sooner
than any other ; but it should not be selected if it appears
that such tax will increase the trade or interfere with its
extirpation. Ten thousand times more revenue can be collected bydestroying than by taxing the liquor trade, for b}' its
extinction how many fold should we multiply the wealth and
happiness of the people now, and for all coming time?
But I believe the granting of any license, high or low, to
make or sell intoxicating drinks is a moral wrong, and that,
by constitutional prohibition of the whole traffic, should be
made a leo-al wronsr, — a crime against the Constitution and
society. There are no considerations of pecuniary advantage to the State which justify it for a moment, — no matter
if proportions were reversed and the profit of the tax were
as great as is the destruction wrought by the traffic.
Can, then, the enactment of a license law ever be justified ? No ! Absolute prohibition should be the law of the
land.
To enact any other is a wrong.
Is the enactment of a license law ever to be excused?
No ! It must, however, sometimes be submitted to. The
trouble about the business is this : We are under the law of
absolute freedom. The traffic stands, like wheat-raising,
under the full protection of the law. The State is responsible for its existence and for its vast proportions, for its
shames, miseries, losses and crimes, — just the same as
thpugh it should fail to enact laws for the preservation of
public order and, still worse, should protect men in making
war upon society. That is the astounding position in which
governments now actually stand. They have given unrestricted consent and full protection, and are partners in the
concern, suffering the losses but getting none of the profits,
save only as they promote an industry presumed to be useful,
because it has been accepted as legitimate by acquiescence
and positive law.
Three cases arise : —
First. Government says to the traffic : " I am in want of
money. You can furnish it better than other occupations.
Therefore I impose a tax." That is what might be said and
done with any other business, and the status of the trade is
untouched.

FROM

LICENSE

TO

PROHIBITION.

359

Second. Government says to the liquor traffic : " You
destroy much good. You are a crime. I will partially
suppress you. I will totally prohibit all but one man in
a thousand from selling at all. I will consent that one man
in a thousand shall sell, but he must give me a part of the
money. I will license him to sell, for a fee which he will
take out of his customers. I will be very strict with him
also. He shall not commit this crime on Sunday nor poison
children under ten years of age in his own store." That is
a license ; it does not read very well, but it is really an
advance over the first position. It is better than nothing,
because it concedes that the business is a crime, — otherwise it could not be interfered Avith for its restriction at all.
Third. The government saj^s to the traffic : " You are a
murderer and you must die." That is prohibition, and it is
right. Free rum ? — Never ! Licensed rum ? — Never !
when possible to do better. And remember that it is always
possible to do better. Why not return to the old practice of
licensing or condoning every crime whatever for cash?
In licensing, and far more in permitting without restriction, the traffic in alcohol, we do license almost every known
crime and form of public evil by wholesale, for this traffic is
their primal cause. In the chapters upon " National Prohibition "and '^What Shall We Do Next?" I have called
attention to the reasons why the so-called prohibitory laws
have partially failed, and will not here repeat what is there
said. These laws have been by far the most successful
of any we have ever had for the suppression of the evils of
intemperance, and they were never repealed by those who
desired their stricter enforcement. No law has ever been
substituted for them which was enforced any better, or in
fact as well. No license law was ever substituted for a
prohibitory law under which the traffic did not increase.
If a prohibitory law gives us free rum how can a license
law restrain it ? One becomes tired of the foolishness which
teaches that license is restraint*. There seems to be no way
to learn save by experience, and, after many days, the whole
country will apply prohibition as the only remedy for evils
which should not exist, and which the people sincerely desire
to destroy.

360

THE

TEMPEEANCE

MOVEMENT.

Prohibition is not a new rule although, from the nature
of things, it is the only one which can result in prevention,
and destroy the traffic. Its imperfect application is the only
possible reason of failure, and it is singular reasoning which
demands the abandonment of the best remedy in disease
because it has not been administered to the patient.
The Emperor of 'China, 2207 years B. C, forbade the
manufacture and drinking of intoxicating liquor, under the
severest penalties, and even renounced its use himself. The
Emperor Claudius suppressed drinking houses and the sale
of liquor. The prohibition of the sale of ardent spirits was
maintained in Sweden from 1753 to 1756, and from 1772 to
1775. In 1637, the General Court of Massachusetts, and in
1676 the New Constitution of Virginia, applied, in part, the
principle of prohibition to the traffic in strong drink ; and so
on until the present time the right of the law-making power
to prohibit has been asserted and vindicated over and over
again. It is not possible, nor would it be profitable, to
review the history of legislation upon the subject in this
work. That has been exhaustively done by Dr. Eddy and
many others. But the principle has been always successfully applied, whether by States throughout their entire
jurisdiction, or in sections and localities, in the form of
what are known as local oj^tion laws, whenever and so far as
its application has been honestly and judiciously attempted.
All prohibitory laws necessarily fail in part, and will continue to fail until they are enacted by authority having complete jurisdiction and power over the evil against which they
are directed.
It is often admitted that prohibition is good for the
country rather than license and free rum ; but not for the
city. Why? — because it can be enforced, it is said, in
the country, but can not be enforced in the city. What is
it, then, in which the good consists? In the prevention, if it
can be secured, in the curtailing or destruction of the traffic.
Then the only question is. Which is the best system, prohibition or license, to secure the end in the city? It being
conceded that prohibition is the thing that is good in any
event. Why cannot prohibition be enforced in the city?
Murder takes place in the city.
Is it therefore either

THE SALOON

AND THE REPUBLIC.

361

licensed or permitted any more than in the country? On
the contrary, the greater the evil or the more rife and
dangerous the crime the more strict the law, and the more
stern should be the execution. Why is martial law declared
in times of turbulence or war? If ordinary methods and
tribunals will not enforce the law against the liquor traffic, it
may become a reason for declaring martial law in the cities,
but not for the repeal of the law and the license of the trade
in death. The one (;ity of New York is now doing more to
destroy the American people than the whole Southern confederacy accomplished from 1861 to 1865.
Indeed, the cities of our countr}' are almost built upon a
framework of saloons, and everywhere the word saloon has
come to be nearly synonymous with the liquor traffic, so
that the anti-saloon movement, so called, is, when the term is
properly used, but another name for the temperance movement
itself. The general inclination to hold that the cit\' should not
be subjected to laws of equal stringency with the rural districts because of the greater difficulty of enforcement in the
cities, when that same difficulty is the strongest reason for
the severest possible prohibitions, inclines me to pause for a
few pages to note the effect of license laws as illustrated in
the chief city of the country. There is nothing like history,
because it " teaches 1)}^ example." The dangerous character
of the saloon, which finds in the city its natural home, has
never l)een better stated than Iw the Hon. "William Windom
in his Woodstock speech delivered on the fourth day of last
July at Mr. Bowen's celebration.
THE

SALOON

IS

A

He says :

MOST
DANGEROUS
REPUBLIC.

ENEMY

TO

THE

" The home and the ballot are the very corner-stones on
which our free institutions rest ; the very holy of holies
behind the sacred altars of Freedom. Destroy the one or
corrupt the other, and free government is a failure. The
liquor saloon aims its deadly blows at both. If the hopes of
our fathers and our own ambition for this great republic
are to be realized, we must protect and cherish the myriads
of homes, where children are daily taught those lessons of
Christianity, liberty, justice and forbearance, which alone

362

THE

TEMPERAXCE

MOVEMENT.

will qualify them for the sacred trust of citizenship. Whatever else the liquor saloons have done, thev have never made
one happy Christian home, and they never will. On the
other hand, they have created unnumbered thousands of
places misnamed homes, where the seeds of disorder and
anarchy are daily planted and nourished in the minds and
hearts of the young. These desecrated homes are the
primary schools in which are taught, by precept and example,
the first lessons in disorder and crime, while the saloons
themselves are the colleges from which the most dangerous
order of criminals are graduated. They stand open night
and day — Sundays included — ready to receive the myriads
of poor, ignorant and misguided wretches whose childhood,
blighted in the drunkard's home, makes them the ready
victims to the teachers of disorder, socialism and anarchy,
who here find their council-chamber and their inspiration.
I verily believe that if the saloon were abolished, the dangerous classes which now menace society would to a great
extent disappear with it. What, think you, would become
of the anarchist and socialist without his ally and assistant ?
Where would he rally his forces? Where would he teach
his treason? Where would he find inspiration for his followers? The saloon system is itself a league of law-breakers, whose example afibrds a most powerful stimulus to
disorder of all kinds. It openly proclaims its purpose
to disobey all laws which interfere with its supreme purpose to make money in its own way, and at whatever
sacrifice.
" Briefly stated, the question is, Shall the liquor power,
with its dire and deadly influences, rule and ruin, or shall it
be utterly destroyed?
" This malign power has organized and massed its mighty
forces for the conflict. It has raised the black flag, and
proclaimed that he who will not swear allegiance to it, and
thereby become jparticeps criminis in its work of destruction and death, shall politically perish. It has even drawn
the assassin's knife, and lighted the torch of the incendiary,
in order to inspire dismay in the ranks of its enemies. The
time has therefore come when this issue must be met.
Political

parties

can

no

longer

dodge

it if they

would.

NEW

YORK,

CITY

OF

SALOOXS.

363

Private citizens must take sides openly, for or ao:aiust the
saloon, Avith its methods and its results."
The frightful prevalence of the drink traffic in our cities,
where license laws almost universally prevail, with the accompanying ignorance, povert}', degradation, vice and crime,
and the corresponding danger to our existence, not onlv as a
nation but also as a people, is the chief source of alarm to
the thoughtful patriotism of our country : and in all civilized
countries from like causes the cities are the primary sources
of peril. In our own the danger is jieculiarly imminent, by
reason of the popular nature of our institutions.
Saj^s Joseph Cook : " Under a thorouglihj free government
the extension of the suffrage to ignorant and intemperate popidations inevitably places the scoundrel class at the head of
affairs.
A drunken people can not be a free people.'"
The e3'e is the chief inlet to knowledge, and the map of Xew
York city which accompanies this book, upon which are located over 9000 of the 10,168 saloons and places where intoxicating liquor was for sale in that metropolis on the thirtieth
day of June, 1886, looks like a chart of the capital city of the
regions of despair. When we consider that this great city controls the pivotal State of the Union, and how helplessly it
drifts in the maelstrom of alcohol, we require more than the
faith which removes mountains if we are still to hope for the
repuljlic. "Whoever continues to hope — and not only do we
hope, but we will conquer j^et — must have the courage to attack and destroy this plague. Here is the license law in full
operation. Behold its blessings ! If the licenses cost still
more, the city would for a time get a larger share of the bloodmoney, and capitalists might consolidate the smaller saloons
in more enticing quarters. And, despairing to save the mass,
there are many able, sincere and practical men who demand
restrictive high license in the hope that they thereby may
save some. But the appetite will remain the same, the
supply the same, and, after a spasmodic contraction perhaps,
the consumption will be the same or greater. The higher
license will soon demonstrate that it is nothing but a new
bandage for the same putrescent body. If it must be in
order that the people may see, let it be done ; yet I can but
think that such waste of time is only made necessary by

364

THE

TEMPERANCE

IMOVEMENT.

failure to note the lessons of hundreds of years of experience,
and by ignoring the plain teachings of natural reason. Meanwhile who is to shoulder the responsibility of the years of
crime and misery in which the thrice-told tale is to be once
more repeated? How many times must it be proved that
two and two are four ? Are we to travel in this fool's treadmill forever? The whole country can control the cities.
Try national as well as State prohibition, and when they fail,
and not till then, fall back upon high license, or, more logically, upon free rum.
The Church Temperance Society of New York has just
issued a pamphlet entitled " New York City and its Masters,"
prepared by Mr. Robert Graham, General Secretary. Mr.
Graham was formerly Secretary of the Church of England
Temperance Society, but now devotes his great ability, with a
zeal and courao-e which command our admiration and gratitude, to a stand-up hand-to-hand fight with the liquor traffic
in our own country.
"New York City and its Masters" contains a series of maps
with accompanying letter-press showing the number of saloons
and their location, together with the churches and public
schools, in each Assembly district. By the courtesy of Mr.
Graham I have availed myself of the following facts from this
work, but hope the reader will obtain the original. By the
courtesy of the Board of Excise Commissioners, Mr. Graham
obtained the following " carefully verified statement of licenses
granted year ending April 30, 1886 :"
First grade, hotel, license fee, |250,
17
Second grade, hotel, license fee, |100,
80
Third grade, saloon, license fee, -175,
8055
Fourth grade, storekeeper (sale off), hcense fee, |75, . 518
Fifth grade, saloon (beer only), license fee, $30,
. . 904
Total license granted,
Number lapsed or revoked during the year, ....

9574
406

Number now in existence,
Estimated number of places selling without license,
disreputable and gambling houses where liquor is
sold,

9168

Total number of places where liquor is obtained,

1000

. . 10,168

NEW

YORK,

CITY

OF

SALOONS.

365

The population of New York was by the census of 1880
1,206,239, of whom 727,629 are native and 478,670 foreignborn. Estimating the present population at 1,400,000, we
have a liquor saloon to every 140 persons, including men,
women and children. The whole number of churches and
chapels is 447, of public schools 121, and "total good educational agencies 568."
But the real condition is much worse than even this startling average of the whole city would indicate. The evil is
unequally distributed. It has its victims by Assembly districts, just as particular men are destroyed by it. In the
First Assembly District there are 43,998 inhabitants, 13
churches, 3 schools and 1072 saloons ; being one church
to 3384 of population, or accommodations to about one
person in six; one school to 14,666, and a saloon to
every 41 of the people. The Second Assembly District
has 47,958 population, 4 churches, 9 schools and 511
saloons. It may be hoped that parochial or private schools
help this somewhat, but not substantially. Mr. Graham
observes, "It is an undoubted fact that just where the
poverty and misery is greatest there is the largest number
of saloons."
The saloon is without doubt the great visible factor of
danger in our government. The anti-saloon movement is
an effort to destroy it with any and every kind of avaihible
weapon, and to utilize the activity' of everybody who will even
ivish death to the saloon, although they will only pelt the rude
boy in the apple-tree with tufts of grass, hoping that in due
time the impotency of such warfare may induce them to
throw the stones of total prohibition.
Mr. Graham has the following table, obtained with
great care and labor " by personal investigation in each
particular case b}^ a committee of our Calvary branch, the
documents for their verification being in their hands," showing the "places where primary and convention meetings
were held preceding the elections of November, 1884."
(See p. 37 of " New York City and its Masters.") If
the American people would study this table, which I feel
sure to be of unquestionable verity, then patriotic men
might thank God and take courage in the hope of a moral

866

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

and political convulsion which would set us free from this
wicked domination.
<a

LIQUOR

' NEXT DOOR
SALOONS.
IS

SALOONS.

TO

"3

"3

PEIMART A:N'D convention MEETINGS HELD IN NEW YORK
CITY PRECEDING
THE NOVEMBER ELECTION
OF 1884.
ci
NEITHER.

ci
to

iw

S
o

eS

>-,a

g
g

a

l-H

a

Convention, .

AJdermanic

.

19

6
17

7

17

18
19

Convention, .

19
16

Primaries,
Totals

....

3
O

63

a

Q

>

a
3
o

M

196
19
443

487

a

a

33

3
oi
g

o

1

3o
1

3

63

3

1

3

7

7

9

64
487

3

1

3

7

3 65
67

3

633

10

71
86

gS

a Q>.
3

a
3
o

3

4

S
H

9

9
27

o

to

o<
a

33
o H

Congressional Convention,
Assembly

Q

S
33

so

6>,

a

o

H

sa

t3

3

6
12

26

7

2

4

12

25

8

2 204

12

226

25

215

36

283

56

Political Meetings held in Saloon,
Political Meetings held next door to Saloon
Political Meetings held apart from Saloons, .

_o

633
86
719
283

Total

In a communication from the Commissioner of Internal
Revenue, dated September 21, 1887, he informs me that the
" production of fermented liquors in the city of New York,
as shown by returns made to this office for the year ended
August 31, 1887, aggregates 3,799,032 barrels of 31 gallons
each."
This is 117,769,992 gallons, and I am assured by a competent observer that the consumption of this enormous amount
or its equivalent takes place chiefly on Manhattan Island — an
average of eighty-four gallons to each man, woman and child
in the city. It is true that much of it is consumed by travelers and transient persons, but in any view it gives one an
almost sublime conception of the capacity of the great throat
of intemperance in America. About twelve hundred heavily
loaded double wagons, drawn by two, four and sometimes
six horses, convey the deluge from the breweries to the

Mrs. Sarah D. La Fetra,
President W. C. 2\ L'., District of Columbia.

NEW

YORK

RULES

AMERICA.

367

lower part of the city daily, for the supply of the infernal
maelstrom. Says my friend Mr. U. H. Painter, who writes
of it : " It don't burn up men's bodies and souls as fast as
vitriol, but it does just as surely; the horses are the finest
in the world, the drivers fat and sleek ; the owners live in
palaces, on the fat of the land. The men and women who
pay for it are gaunt and always hungry ; they live in poverty
— hope has no abiding place there ; the poison lures them to
crime, to infamy, to hell. No man can strike them too hard.
Lay on the lash. It is the crying shame of the world, the
canker-worm of society, the skeleton that walks everywhere,
day and night, and sleeps not ; it is Dante's ' Inferno ' here
olarino- at us all ! "
Beyond all this are the still greater ravages of distillation.
NEW

YORK

CITY

RULES

AMERICA

TO-DAY.

Only the nation can emancipate itself — if indeed it be not
already too late. Look again at the map ; consider the relation of New York to the whole country and the relation of our
country to the world. "What can license do in such a case ? A
teaspoonful dose of soothing-syrup to a volcano in full eruption ! What local option? No more — even less. AVhat
can prohibition by the State? That is only local option by
States, and New York City is a great cancer with deadly roots
in every State and Territory in the Union. So Chicago, St.
Louis, San Francisco, Philadelphia, Cincinnati, Boston — all
great commercial cities — are great national cancers, and can
be reached, if at all, only by national cure. You may give
hypodermic injections on any part of the surfoce of the body ;
that is what we have done so far. It relieves pain, but it
does not cure ; and if we continue as hitherto, our descendants will, if the race survives, be repeating our follies and
failures a thousand years hence. This need not be. Good
people must give their liquor up. Until they do, bad people
will have theirs ; and in this the bad people are right. High
license — any restrictive license — is a contrivance to give
good, well-to-do people their liquor in a respectable Avay,
while the poor and the bad are to be compelled by law to
practice a virtue which the former will not. Self-denial is
the essence of the genuine temperance movement ; and self-

568

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

denial by the whole of society must be the spirit of all successful temperance legislation, as it is of individual reform.
Hear Dr. Talmadge thunder against license, and especially
high license :
" Do you not realize, as by mathematical demonstration,
that the one result of this high-license movement, and the one
result of the closing of small establishments — if that were
the result — and the opening of a few large establishments,
Avill be to make rum-selling and rum-drinking highly respectable ? These drinkeries in Brooklyn and New York are so
disgusting that a man will not risk his reputation by going
into them
Now, suppose all these small establishments are closed up, and that then you open the palaces of
inebriation down on the avenues. It is not the rookeries
of alcoholism that do the worst work ; they are only the last
stopping-places on the road to death. Where did that
bloated, ulcerous, wheezing wretch, that staggers out of a
rum-hole, get his habits started? At a glittering restaurant,
or l3ar-room of a first-class hotel, where it was fashionable to
go
I say, give us the rash, rather than the carbuncles. Here you will have a splendid liquor establishment :
Masterpieces of painting on the wall ; cut-glass on the silver
platter; upholstery like a Turkish harem
All the
phantasmagoria and bewitchment of art thrown around this
Herod of massacre, this Moloch of consumed worshippers,
this Juggernaut of crushed millions ! Do you not see that
this high-license movement strikes at the heart of the best
homes in America? .... Tell it to all the philanthropists
who are trying to make the world better, and let journalists
tell it, by pen and by type, that this day, in the presence of
my Maker and my Judge, I stamp on this high-license movement as the monopoly of abomination."
But to return from this practical illustration of the ruinous
work of license laws. The law should everywhere declare
that there can be no property in alcohol which is designed to
be used as a beverage, and decree its destruction just as
slavery was abolished, because there can be no property in
man. Certainly the destruction without compensation should
be decreed for all alcoholic beverao-es created after the enactment of prohibitory law.
If there can be no property in

PROHIBITION

PROHIBITS.

36?

man, and therefore there shall be no slavery, then certainly
that which is designed only for the injury of man, and which
is created illegally, should not be protected by law.
I admit that it would be proper to destroy the public
enemy, by the administration of alcohol ; but for the reason
that he is the public enemy, and for no other, and then only
when the use of poison is justifiable.
The good use — the medicinal use — is justified because a
poison is necessary to an abnormal state of things — to
alleviate or cure a snake bite, a disease, or a Avound, just as,
to follow the analogy, involuntary servitude and confinement,
and still further interference with personal liberty, is inflicted
upon the criminal, even unto death.
But why should society permit the infliction upon itself —
and upon its own innocent mem])ers who are entitled to protection b}^the very nature of social and civil relations and obligations, the same or greater evils than the penalties of crime,
and, in fact, the very crimes themselves. It is high time
that society learned that its first obligation is not to punish
criminals, but to eradicate the causes of crime. Eemove the
causes which create criminals, and there will be neither
criminals nor crimes. Society does whatever it permits its
individual members to do. If society, having power to prevent or to restrict, creates, or permits its memljers to create
that substance or influence, whatever it may be, but for the
existence of which there would be less of disease, suflTering,
or crime, it foils in its duty, in the very end for which
society organizes and establishes government ; and thus
becomes itself a criminal. And because it is thus ignorant
and criminal, penalties inevitable, inexorable and terrible
are inflicted upon society by the Almighty, in the administration of his outraged laws.
To one who has lived in a State or section of the country
where both the prohibitory law and the opposing legislation
have been fiiirly tried in contrast with each other, the solecism that '' prohibition does not prohibit " is an absurdity.
I know from my own observation and memory, and from
careful inquiry in Vermont and ]\laine, of the great transformation wrought by the ]Maiue law in those States where it
has been longest and most thoroughly tried, notwithstandins:
24

370

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

the disiidvantages under which its administration has labored^
by reason of the hostile position of the general government,
of the traffic, and of other influences, that drunkenness has
been almost abolished from the rural population, and greatly
restrained in the cities by the influence of that beneficent
enactment. Gov. Dingley of Maine is one of the most
competent of witnesses on this subject, and I will quote a
few sentences of what he has said of the operation of the law
in that State :
"In 1830, thirteen distilleries in the State manufactured
one million gallons of rum (two gallons to each inhabitant),
together with 300,000 gallons imported — not including
cider and other imported liquors. Now there is not a brewery or distillery in the State. In 1833, there were five
hundred taverns, all but forty of them having open bars.
Now there is not a tavern in the State with an open bar, and
not one in ten of them sells liquor secretly. In 1830 every
store sold liquor as freely as molasses ; now not one.
"In 1832, with a population of only 450,000, there were
2000 places where intoxicating liquors were sold — one grogshop to every 225 of population. Their sales amounted to
$10,000,000 annually, or $20 for each inhabitant. Last
year the average sale of a hundred town agencies was $100,000, or fifteen cents per inhabitant. Including clandestine
sales, even the enemies of temperance do not claim that the
aggregate sales in the State exceed $1,000,000, less than $2
per inhabitant. This is but one-tenth of what they were
forty years ago, and one-eighth of what the)'^ are on the average in the remainder of the Union, which is $16 per inhabitant. Liquor selling is almost wholly confined to the five or
six cities of the State, so that hard drinkers are compelled to
journey thither for their drams. Hence, most of the drunkenness of the State is concentrated in those cities, where the
police arrest all persons under the influence of strong drink,
making the number of arrests for drunkenness seem large in
comparison with places where few arrests are made for this
offense. In 1855 there were 10,000 persons (one out of
every 45 of the population) accustomed to get beastly
drunk ; there were 200 deaths from delirium tremens annually (equivalent to 300 now) ; there were 1500 paupers

Gen.

Cli7iton B. Fisk,
of A'e'iii Jersey.

PROHIBITION

PROHIBITS.

371

(equivalent to 2200 now) made thus by drink ; there were
300 convicts in State prison and jails (equivalent to 450
now) ; and intemperance was destroying a large proportion
of the homes throughout the State. Now not one in 300 of
the population is a drunkard — not one-sixth as many ; the:
deaths from delirium tremens annually are not fifty, and
criminals and paupers (not including rumsellers) are largely
reduced, notwithstanding the great influx of foreigners ancL
tramps."
This testimony can be corroborated b}^ the whole State if^
necessary, and is but a fair statement of the eifectof the law in
New Hampshire and in Vermont. New Hampshire has been
specially hindered in the enforcement of the law by the unfortunate habits of her great accessions of foreign population.
If the law had been left to operate upon our native population since its enactment in 1855, I do not l)elieve that there
would have been one-tenth of the intemperance which now
exists. But with increasing intelligence the personal habits
of the people are sure to improve, and the measures adopted
to extirpate this crying evil by a better enforcement of the
prohibitory law are sure to become more and more rather
than less stringent. I do not think that during the whole
thirty-two years during which the prohil^itory law has stood
upon the statute book of the State, it was ever so impregnably fortified in the confidence and even afiection of the people as now, and he would be a rash man who would propose,
and that political party would commit suicide which should
seriously attempt its repeal. It is above the domain of party
contention. We do not repeal the law against nmrder,
AVe enforce it. So should and so will the people yet
enforce the laws noAv existing and hereafter to be enacted
prohibiting the main cause of murder and of every other
crime.

CHAPTER
NATIONAL

XVIII.

PKOHIBITION.

No other Form of Real Prohibition Possible — Control the Traffic from
Origin to End — Necessity of Exerting the National Power — National
Prohibition the Plan of Battle — Prohibition Amendment to National
Constitution Presented in 1876 — Its Provisions Noted — The Subject
Discussed from the National Stand-point — Manufacture as well as
Sale must be Prohibited — The Temperance Reform most needs
Nationalization — Concentrate on National Prohibitory Amendment
to Constitution — Right and Necessity of National Legislation Discussed— The Amendment Reviewed — State Proliibition and National
Prohibition Together — National Prohibitory Amendment should be
the Preliminary Bunker Hill, not the Crowning Yorktown.
THAVE elsewhere endeavored to show that government
should take jurisdiction of the liquor traffic and that
prohibition is the only effective way in which that jurisdiction can be asserted.
Assuming, for the purposes of the argument, that law
should prohibit the traffic, I desire, in this chapter, to call
attention to the necessity and to the proper method of
national action, if any essential or permanent reform is to be
effected through the agency of law.
No other form of real prohibition is possible. No prohibitory law now exists or ever has existed in this country.
None has existed or does exist or can exist in any State.
No prohibitory law has failed to prohibit, for there can be
no prohibitory law taking jurisdiction of the liquor traffic
unless it controls it from origin to end — from the point of
its manufacture, or wherever it comes within our borders,
and so through all the channels of distribution to the stomach
of the consumer. Now, it is a fact that from the foundation
of the national government until to-day it has not only permitted, but has fostered and protected the traffic in alcoholic
liquors.
The Constitution, as construed, is for the traffic, and- the
laws are made and enforced in pursuance of the Constitution.
372

GOVERNMENT,

STATE

AND

NATIONAL.

373

I am not now referring to the comparatively unimportant
power of Congress over the Territories and the District of
Columbia, which may affect one-fortieth of our people ; but
to the relation of the Constitution and the laws to the traffic
in the States where the mass of the people are who are
ruined by it.
Our government is not only peculiar in this that it is
republican in form, but especially so in the distribution of
its powers. Such, indeed, have been the origin, growth and
final combination of our institutions that we hardly conceive
of the government in its true nature. From the force of
habits of thought, and forms of action and of expression
which we continually use and witness, we come to believe
that we live under two distinct governments at the same
time, which is an impossibility.
We speak of the national government and of the State
government. Neither is the government. Each is a department or branch of the government, which comprises them
l)oth, and by the union of both is itself one. The American
people are a unit, a nation, and that people is the great
fact behind both State and national or general forms, who
create both, each with separate, generall}^ independent but
sometimes concurrent powers. As the people are one people, so the State and the national branches spring, not either
from the other, but from the same root, and arc one tree.
Both combined have only the same powers which the English Parliament possesses alone. The powers of government
being divided between these national and State branches,
there are some things which each can perform fully without
the co-operation of the other. There are other things Avhich,
from their nature, require the action of the government
itself, as a whole, acting by and through both State and
national forms. The one has general jurisdiction of local
interests, the other of the interests of individuals and of the
States in their larsfer relations and with other sovereis^nties.
Yet the relation of the individual is direct to each branch of
the government in its proper sphere. This peculiarity may
be, in some respects, a weakness, but, on the whole, although
it may diminish velocity, it increases strength, and is the
very citadel of our liberties.
If, then, there be an interest

374

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

or an evil which is everywhere, and which exists and is felt
hy each individual and by the people as a whole, in all the
States and Territories of the republic, which is, in short,
national, that interest or that evil is sure to require the protection, regulation or prohibition of the whole power of the
people, exerted through both the State and national divisions
of the one government.
Such an interest, if it be an interest, or such an evil, if it
be an evil, is the liquor traffic.
It is already conceded that the States may regulate, license
or prohibit, within their own jurisdiction, the manufacture
and sale of liquors for home consumption, not interfering
with it when coming within their borders from other domestic or foreign States while it remains and, it is intended that
it shall remain, in the original packages.
It is, then, the special purpose of this chapter to discuss
the necessity of the assertion of national power, concurrent
with that of the States, for the extirpation of the traffic, if it
is ever to be extirpated, and the enlargement of the national
powers by amendment of the national Constitution, so that
the whole people shall summarily and forever dispose of the
evil, without waiting for the tardy action or stubborn resistance of adverse localities.
In my humble judgment, the temperance reform waits on
the comprehension of this thought, and will practically fail
until national prohibition is adopted as the plan of battle.
Before proceeding to a more general discussion of the
subject of national prohibition, there should be a word of
explanation upon the forms which the proposition has hitherto assumed. The first proposition for the amendment of
the national Constitution so as to prohibit the traffic in
intoxicating beverages, so far as I have knowledge, was
introduced by myself in the House of Kepresentatives,
December 27, 1876. The joint resolution was in the following words and was supported by a speech of considerable
length. I have introduced this resolution in every succeeding Congress, and it was favorably reported to the Senate by
the Committee on Education and Labor of the 49th Congress. This resolution proposes an absolute affirmative prohibition by the nation of the traffic in distilled alcoholic

NATIONAL

PROHIBITORY

AMENDMENT.

375

beverages from and after the year 1900, while the fermented
drinks are left to the regulation of the States, with an
enlargement of the powers of the States so as to sfive to
them absolute control of the traffic in fermented drinks
w^ithin their own jurisdiction, free from the protection which
the national government now extends to it in the regulation
of commerce and by the exercise of other powers, thus practically preventing the exercise of the police power by the
State against the evil even when prohibition is attempted by
the State.
Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of A^nerica, in Congress assembled {tioo-thirds of
each House concurring therein), That the following amendment to
the Constitution be, and hereby is, jn-oposed to the States, to become valid when ratified by the Legislatures of three-fourths of
the several States, as provided in the Constitution :
ARTICLE

— .

Section 1. From and after the year of our Lord 1900 the
manufacture and sale of distilled alcoholic intoxicating liquors, or
alcoholic liquors any part of which is obtained by distillation or
process equivalent thereto, or any intoxicating liquors mixed
or adulterated with ardent spirits, or with any poison whatever,
except for medicinal, mechanical, chemical and scientific purposes,
and for use in the arts, anywhere within the United States and tlie
Territories thereof, shall cease ; and the importation of sucli liquors
fi'om foreign states and countries to the United States and Territories, and the exportation of such liquors from and the transportation thereof within and through any part of this country, except
for the use and purposes aforesaid, shall be, and hereby is, forever
thereafter prohihited.
Sec 2. Nothing in this article shall be construed to waive or
abridge any existing power of Congress, rior the right, which is
hereby recognized, of the people of any State or Territory to enact
laws to prevent the increase and for the suppression or regulation
of the manufacture, sale and use of liquors, and the ingredients
thereof, any part of which is alcoholic, intoxicating or poisonous,
within its own limits, and for the exclusion of such liquors and
ingredients therefrom at any time, as well before as after the close
of the year of our Lord 1900 ; but until then, and until ten years
after the ratification hereof, as provided in the next section, no
State or Territory shall interfere with the transportation of said
liquors or ingredients, in packages safely secured, over the usual

376

THE

TEMPEEANCE

MOVEMENT.

lines of traffic to other States and Territories wherein the manufacture, sale and use thereof for other purposes and use than those
excepted in the first section shall be lawful : Provided^ That the
true destination of such packages be plainly marked thereon.
Sec. 3. Should this article not be ratified by three-fourths of
the States on or before the last day of December, 1890, then the
first section hereof shall take effect and be in force at the expiration of ten years from such ratification ; and the assent of any
State to this article shall not be rescinded nor reversed.
Sec. 4. Congress shall enforce this article by all needful legislation.
The prohibitory sentiment of the country demands that
the national Constitution be so amended as to include the
absolute inhibition of fermented, as well as of distilled beverages, and the astonishing development and great evils of
the use of fermented drinks, and the ease with wdiich they
are now fortified with pure alcohol and other drugs and poisons until the distinction between distilled and fermented
liquors is lost, justify this demand of the earnest friends of
prohibition. In unity there is strength, and so far as I can
I shall contribute to that end by supporting the more comprehensive restriction of this nefarious trade. A successful
result may or may not be longer delayed, but there will be
at least unity of action, without which no progress whatever
will be made. In the advocacy of the original amendment
I have given my reasons for the form in which the proposition was made. I had hope of its earlier adoption in that
form, and that from its success would follow the destruction
of the trade in fermented as well as in distilled drinks. If
experience shall vindicate the correctness of that judgment,
no one will regret it more than myself. In the 50th Congress
I shall introduce the proposed amendment for the absolute
prohibition by the nation of the traffic in all forms of alcoholic beverages, and trust that a long-suffering people will
rise in their might for its adoption, and for the rescue of our
civilization from the monster's grasp. Let us now proceed
to consider the necessity of the national prohibition of the
traffic in intoxicating drinks.

NATIONAL

NECESSITY

OF

PROHIBITION.

NATIONAL

377

PROHIBITION.

No general public evil has ever been permanently removed
or generally restrained without the agency of law. Indeed,
how can such an evil be removed unless there is a public
opinion against it ? Unless public opinion is pronounced
against it, there is no evil which the forces of society will
endeavor to remove. Law is the inevitable result of moral
suasion whenever moral suasion is effective ; and to say that
there shall be no law is to say that there shall be no moral
suasion to demonstrate the existence of the evil and to create
pu1)lic opinion for its removal.
The premises involve the conclusion which logically follows. Therefore, whoever asserts the existence of a general
evil destructive to society, inflicted Avholly or in part by its
individual members upon each other, asserts the necessity of
a law to assist in its removal and to prevent its restoration.
We have already adverted to the nature of the evil of
alcoholism, and to the self-evident fact that but for the production ofthe cause through the agency of a great industry
protected by law, the terrible consequences could not exist.
If, then, laws to prohibit or restrain the evil of alcoholic
intemperance should exist, the only inquiry which remains
is, Avhat is the l^est law to effect the purpose? The object
of the law should be to extirpate the evil. Is alcoholic intemperance anational evil? If so, should it not be prohibited by national law?
But if a national evil, it follows that it is one cursing all
sections — every Territory and every State. If so, unless
exclusive jurisdiction over it has been confided by the States
and people to the general government, the law-making power
in every State should also prohibit the evil in its jurisdiction.
But we find on examination of our complex form of government, embracing in one grand whole that of the nation and
of the States, that what is called the police power is in the
States and the people at large ; that no substantial part of it
has been confided to the oreneral ijovernment, at least no
more than it may be necessary to exercise in order to preserve the powers expressly or by fair implication delegated
to it in the fundamental law.

378

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

The police power is that under which the traffic in intoxicating drink must be controlled and prohibited, if at all —
and it resides in the States. But the States and people have
expressly given to the general government the right and
power to regulate commerce with foreign nations, among the
several States, and with the Indian tribes. The general government recognizes and protects alcohol as property and as
an article of legitimate commerce. So long as any State,
domestic or foreign, continues to permit the manufacture of
alcohol and the traffic therein, the general government stands
pledged to exercise all its powers of legislature, judicature
and execution to protect and facilitate the continued infliction of the curse.
States may do much to rescue their people, and public sentiment everywhere may cry out in its extremity, but so long
as the constitution and laws of the United States guarantee
the safe importation and transportation of alcoholic beverages
in the original packages through the ports and over the avenues
of interstate commerce of this country, the extinction or substantial restraint of the evil is impossible. If the demand
did not already exist, local laws and public opinion might,
perhaps, suffice ; but not now, when every hamlet, and some
inmate of almost every house in the whole land, is cursed by
unnatural desire. I would not be understood to discourage
the efforts to secure prohibitory laws, both constitutional and
statutory, in the States. They are indispensable, and even
when these efforts fail, or, the laAvs being enacted, their purpose partially fails, still, they constitute the nucleus of that
agitation which forms public opinion, and lead gradually up
to that universal public judgment which, sooner or later,
will amend the constitution of the country so as to prohibit
absolutely this baneful traffic everywhere by national law.
It should be observed that such an amendment of the national
constitution would not be an infringement upon the police or
any other powers of the States and of the people. Quite the
contrary ; for this power, now in the general government, to
regulate commerce in alcohol, nullifies the police powders of
the States to protect their people from an evil which falls under
their absolute jurisdiction, in theory, and which in its tremendous scope includes almost every burden and crime, to

i ''i

Mrs. Maij
President

W.

C\

T.

T. Btcrt,
U., of Kew

York.

PROHIBITION

OF

MANUFACTURE.

379

prevent which the State governments themselves exist. Such
an amendment would, first, remove all restrictions from the
efforts of States, and, second, would place the general government affirmatively on the side of the interests of the whole
people and of all the States, in their efforts to deliver themselves from the body of this death. Commerce with foreign
powers must be regulated by national laws, and there are
States and Territories of the United States wherein, if left to
themselves, the manufacture and trade would exist, it may
be, forever ; consequently, under our complex system of government, itwould be impracticable to remove the causes of
alcoholic intemperance Avithout an amendment to the national
laAvs. Such an amendment of the national constitution is the
proper immediate objective point of all temperance agitation
and work. There has been la])or enough long since expended to have secured the result if directed to this great
end. There will never be any substantial and permanent
temperance reform in this country, so far as the same is
dependent upon law, until the sporadic efforts of States and
sections are made to converge upon the real citadel of the
rum curse, which is the national constitution.
MUST

PROHIBIT

MANUFACTURE.

There is another fallacj'' or misdirection of energy which is
now, fortunately, being generally remedied. Prohibition
has been directed against the sale merely, while the manufacture has not been interfered with ; so that, as a matter of
fact, there has never been a prohibitory law in this country.
It is impossible to enact a prohibitory law, in its true sense,
by any State. It is apparent that to prohil^it the sale while
the manufacture and transportation are unrestrained and the
appetite everywhere exists is nugatory. No prohibition of
the manufacture and transportation can be effective unless by
virtue of national law, because the manufacture for the
world can take place on any single square mile of the continent, and transportation is controlled by national power.
Those who sneeringly say that prohilntion does not prohibit
should remember that there never yet was a prohibitory law
in this countr3^ When the nation has prohi))ited the importation, manufacture, transportation and sale of intoxicating

380

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

beverages, and that sort of prohibition does not prohibit, it
will be ample season to cry out against the efficiency of
enactments which seek to extirpate crime from the land by
the removal of its great exciting cause.
It is often said that it is impossible to prevent the manufacture ofalcohol for use as a beverage. Why is it more
difficult to prevent the manufacture than the sale, for improper uses, by law? All civilized governments attempt to
regulate or prohibit the sale. The nation knows every distillery, and taxes and thrives upon its product. Some States
permit and regulate the sale for legitimate uses, while others
license and regulate the sale for all, and the right to do one
implies the right to do the other whenever the public good
may require.
What difficulty, then, could the nation experience in prohibiting and preventing, substantially, the creation and transportation of alcohol for any but medicinal, scientific and
other indispensable uses, if the attempt were seriously made ?
Even if only partially successful, why not make the most
reasonable eff'orts, if we are to make any, to remove the evil,
or abandon the field entirely? I have no argument with
those, if such there be, who are opposed to any legislation
against the liquor traffic — with those who would either
license it or make it wholly free. Such people, to be consistent, should repeal the whole criminal code, and recite the
golden rule to pirates and snakes.
If we are to legislate at all upon the subject, why not aim
to ascertain the real nature and full extent of the evil, and
then enact laws whose jurisdiction is complete, and whose
penalties and prohibitions are commensurate to the end?
Hitherto all legislation has been by the States. Necessarily
it has been confined chiefly to the sale and use by individuals.
The States can partially reach the sale and use within their
own borders, but the manufacture and distribution are practically beyond their control, and therefore may almost as well
be unrestricted by the States, since to prohibit within their
respective limits is merely to drive capital and labor elsewhere,
without perceptibly diminishing the use by their own citizens.
Such attempts by the State are like removing the Mississippi
river in sections, or abolishing the east wind by law.

NATIONALIZATION

ESSENTIAL.

381

For half a century, the working life of more than two generations, gigantic efforts have been put forth by noble men
and women, by philanthropists, by statesmen and by States,
to restrain and destroy the alcoholic evil, through the operation of moral suasion and by State law. Public sentiment
has been aroused, and public opinion created, and at times,
in my belief, it might have been crystallized into national
law had the labor been properly directed. But it has failed,
as it will ahvays fail so long as we save at the spigot and
waste at the bung. I borrow this expressive simile from
the business of the enemy. The temperance question is in
its nature a national question, just as much so as the tariff is,
and more so than slavery was. It is waste of time to deal
with it onhj by towns and counties and States. All possible
local effort should be put forth against the liquor death
everywhere. The j^ellow-fever should be fought in the byways and hospitals by the physician and the nurse as well as
by the quarantine of our ports, and the suspension of infected
traffic by national law ; I)ut the enemy Avill forever come in
like a flood, unless the nation, which is assailed as a nation,
defends itself as a nation. Battle-fields are local, but the
powersress which
contend
are restoration
national. "What
progAvould have
been upon
made them
in the
of national
integrity, if the war for the Union had been conducted by
the States in isolation, and their efforts had been confined to
their own geographical jurisdiction respectively?
NATIONALIZATION.

"What the temperance reform most needs is unification of
effort, nationalization. Samson was not more completely
hampered by withes than is this giant reform by the geographical lines of States ; and if its supporters would but
use their strength, they would at once find their natural arena
circumscril^ed only by the national domain.
How shall this be done ?
By concentration upon the enactment of national constitutional law. The nation can act in no other way than by
law, and now there is no national law for the removal of the
alcoholic evil. On the contrary, we have seen how by guaranteeing the importation and transportation, and permitting

382

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

the manufacture, the national constitution is the very citadel
of the rum power.
Believino- as I do that the misdirection of effort, and not
the lack of comprehension of the extent of the evil or of
earnest desire to remove it, is the reason why the temperance
reform has so little of actual result to show for the agitation
of the last fifty years, at the risk of some repetition, I
will reproduce, with occasional changes, views expressed by
myself a few years since, when endeavoring to secure concentration upon a national plan of action. One thing is certain — that the promoters of the traffic most dread a national
movement. So long as the nation is their city of refuge in
its territory and its laws, they fear not what man can do
unto them. If they are persecuted in one place, as did
the early Christians, they flee into another, and wait for the
returning tide, which, like the ever recurrent pressure of the
ocean upon Holland, can be excluded only by national dykes.
But national prohibition would be the end of the traffic.
They instinctively know it, and everywhere cry out, " Take
any form but that." The liquor interest of this country and
of the world is in the hands of great men. They are a tremendous power. They are neither better nor much worse,
as a class, than those who control other business affairs.
Many of them are " our best citizens." Whatever they do
society permits, and often demands for its own gratification.
But they know what hurts them when they suffer and what
will destroy them when they hear it proposed. They know
that national prohibition will do it. They are opposed to
national prohibition. They consider prohibitionists to be
cranks and fanatics. When the " children of light," as we
temperance people love to consider ourselves, as compared
with the liquor-dealing " children of this world," perceive
the vulnerable point in the enemy's fortifications, they will
charge upon it under the national banner, and in saving the
nation they will save all its parts.
RIGHT

AND

NECESSITY

OF

LEGISLATION.

The right of government to legislate upon the subject of
intemperance has been strongly denied, but the absolute
necessity of prohibition or regulation of the traffic in intoxi-

Hon.

Rlijah A. Morse,

of the Governor s Council, Mass.

RIGHT

OF

TEMPERANCE

LEGISLATION.

383

eating drinks has been demonstrated in every civilized country where their use has unfortunately become prevalent, and
the statute-books of England and America, for two centuries
at least, bear constant witness to the exercise of that power.
The question has been raised and settled in the Supreme
Court of the United States, and by the highest tribunals in
almost every State of the Union, if not in all. It is too late
to deny the power, the right, and the necessity of such legislation. Itis only a question of the jurisdiction by which
it shall be enacted and the extent to which it shall be
carried.
In this connection I wish to call attention to a fallacy
which exists m the minds of many. It is assumed by the
advocates of the traffic of intoxicating liquors that there is a
distinction between the right of government to enact legislation totally and that which is partially prohibitory. Government, itis said, may license and regulate, but may not
prohibit. But there is no such distinction in reason at all.
The power to partially prohibit by license restricted to individuals and to a certain number — which is prohibition so far
as it restricts at all — is the same power and stands upon the
same ground — that is, the obligation to promote the general
welfare — as that to prohibit absohitely. A license to only
one man to make or sell ardent spirits is an absolute prohibition to all the rest of the community to do so at all. The
advocates of the license and regulation of the traffic have no
logical ground upon which to object to absolute prohibition,
if necessity requires. It is only a question of degree. The
universal sense of mankind has passed that point where it is
necessary to demonstrate the right to prohibit absolutely
and totally. There is in fact no difference between restraint
and prohibition as a principle. Prohibition is never held to
extend beyond those uses which are demonstrably injurious
to society. For all necessary and beneficial purposes prohibitory laws permit or license the traffic. I think this view
of the subject important and a complete reply to those who
claim that the evil should be licensed and regulated, at the
same time that they hold the total prohibition to be a violation of inalienable right and the enactment of a sumptuary
law.
The one is as much a sumptuary law and a violation

384

THE

TEMPEEANCE

MOVEMENT.

of inalienable right as the other, and no more so. If this is
true, and I am not able to see wherein it is false, there is an
end of the argument between the advocates of license and
prohibition as to the right of such legislation, for they stand
upon common ground, and there is no logical position for
those who controvert the justice of prohibitory laws, so
called, but that of those who advocate the unrestricted right
to manufacture and sell intoxicating liquors to everybody for
all purposes ; and that ground has not been held by any
court for generations to my knowledge.
The objection to license is that there is not enough of
practical prohibition in it to diminish the evil.
Alcohol has its uses. It is a necessity in the arts. It is
invaluable for many medicinal purposes, and as such is
entitled to protection as property. But, on the other hand,
it is armed with fatal capacity to destroy. It is a Pandora's box of evils. In its peculiarly fatal form, that of
distillation, which is concentrated death, it was unknown
for five thousand years of the world's history, and mankind were the better for their ignorance. The fruit of this
tree of knowledo-e has been death. Durino- the last three
centuries what is known as ardent spirits with us, and the
immense and dreadful curses which grow out of their use,
have gradually arisen. They have the power of perverting
the natural instincts and tastes of both body and mind, and
to recreate man into the slave of perverted appetites, having
insatiable, consuming, uncontrollable, devilish power. The
image of God becomes dangerous to society as well as to
himself, whether as a maniac or as a criminal, and it is this
consequence of the use of intoxicating liquors w^hich the laws
have constantly, but imperfectly, undertaken to control for
many years : nothing more.
The prohibitory amendment to the national constitution
proposes to extend over the national domain the protection
of a constitutional inhibition of the destructive tendencies
of liquors when made and used for purposes which have
been proved to be detrimental to society, and which many of
the States of the Union have endeavored vainly to restrict
and destroy.
Nothing but a general law can be efficient.
That has

PROHIBITION

AND

MORAL

SUASION.

385

been demonstrated by experience. While one State prohibits, another manufactures and encourages. The appetite
already exists. It increases and even becomes hereditary.
More than one hundred and sixty thousand saloons and tippling places educate the children of America in habits of
intoxication, and the appetite ivill crush the imaginary lines
which State legislation erects against the introduction of this
evil merchandise, even as the billows of the lake which
burneth with fire and l)rimstone might be supposed to bury
and consume the paper on which that legislation is written.
The manufacture and the appetite act and react upon each
other. The demand creates the supply, and constantly
cries out, " Give ! give ! " The supply or manufacture is
thus stimulated and perpetuated. It will always continue
unless stopped by the union of persuasion and compulsion,
because of its lucrative nature, and because the appetite for
strong drink, when once established, lives with an infernal
immortality through successive generations of men. Thus it
is that the necessity of legal enactment is apparent. True
that behind legal enactments, as in all other cases where
public evils and crimes are prohibited by law, must be public opinion, which is the basis of all law in a free country
where the people rule, and public opinion is the creature of
experience, argument, discussion, and personal appeal — in
short, of "moral suasion," as these agencies are called in
their application to the subject of intemperate vice in the
use of spirituous liquors. " Moral suasion " must precede
the law, and accompany and assist in its enforcement. They
are allies. The one grows out of the other just as the laiu
against theft grows out of the universal sentiment of mankind that theft is wrong and a public evil which must be
prevented by the forces of society.
Laws to protect society against intoxication inevitably
grow out of moral suasion, if there is enough of it to arouse
the general conscience and the intelligent apprehension of
the people to the enormous losses and wrongs inflicted by
alcohol upon society at large. Thus it is that the call for
more of moral suasion and less of law is a contradiction of
terms. These forces are in harmony like a father and son in
a partnership ; the law steps in and enlarges and perpetuates
25

386

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

the business which moral suasion has established after years
of indefatigable industry upon the platform, through the
press, and by private solicitation and appeal. And for any
person to cry out against a law against the use of intoxicating liquors in society which could never have been enacted at
all but in consequence of moral suasion, and say that it
injures the cause because you cannot co7npel men to do right
against their will, is to say that all crime and every public
evil shall go free of the law ; not only that, but that society
shall abandon all conservative and preventive means for the
protection of those who come after us ; that not only shall
the law abandon the present but the rising generation, and,
in fact, consistency will require that in the end moral suasion
itself must be abandoned, since its inevitable result is a
formal embodiment of its teachings in general law, as soon
as it has produced a strong public sentiment upon which law
can rest, and which will enforce the law.
I have already asked attention to the facts, which, as I
think, demonstrate that the unrestricted use and effect of
distilled spirits constitute public evils of such a nature as to
not only justify, but compel the interposition of the law ;
just now I wish to confine attention to the necessity of
national legislation, if we would reach the evil effectively.
It is evident, in the first place, that the intense thirst or
appetite of the country wdll lead to the manufacture and
transportation of alcohol for the purpose of its gratification.
If the production is suppressed everywhere else in the whole
country, still, in a single one of the smallest States where
the manufacture might be allowed (and the temptation to
permit the manufacture in small and isolated localities would
be greatly increased in the proportion that the concentration
of the business made its existence profitable to the State for
purposes of taxation and otherwise), the materials being
transported, as they would be from other States, the entire
supply of all kinds of distilled spirits for the whole country
could easily be furnished. The manufacture might be localized, but it Avould still exist, and all the efforts of State
legislation elsewhere would thus be substantially thwarted.
Again, supposing that every State and Territory in the
country should suppress the manufacture, and importation

NATIONAL

LAW

ESSENTIAL.

387

from abroad should continue, the evil "would remain the
same ; and we should only have transferred the manufacture,
with the immense capital engaged in it, to a foreign country,
to which we should first export our corn and rye and wheat,
to be returned in the form of imported liquors to the dry
throats of American consumers. Thus we should retain the
evil after depriving ourselves of the revenues derived from
it. Now, since State legislation cannot interfere with the
manufacture outside its own limits, nor possibly within its
own limits for exportation to other States, and as commerce,
alike domestic and foreign, is controlled by the general government, itis apparent that any legal enactment which goes
to the root of the matter must be national in its scope and
character. So far as the exportation to other countries is
concerned, while I do not say that it could not be still carried
on without great evil to our own people, aside from the waste
of material, and the perversion of capital and labor from
useful purposes, yet to continue to poison mankind at large,
with what we bad prohibited to ourselves, would be like
peddling off to our neigh])ors the contaminated and fatal
garments which we might have had left after the small-pox
or yellow-fever had run through our own family.
As a means of suppression, the power to arrest the article
in transitu is hardly less important than that to prevent the
manufacture and sale ; l)ut this power can never be effectively exercised so long as the United States protects the
transportation of ardent spirits to the same extent as other
forms of property from one part of the country to another.
Experience has demonstrated the impossibility of prevention
when there is a chance to procure and while all the innumera])le avenues of transportation are open.
xVgain, the power to control the manufacture and sale and
use of distilled alcoholic liquors is to be found under the
head of the police power of government, as it is called, which
is vested primarily in the several States ; and in order that
this power be exercised by the nation at large, except in the
District of Columbia and the Territories, the Constitution
must first be amended so as to o-ive the national o-overnment
the right to co-operate with the States in the enforcement of
that power for the restriction of this traffic.
There is no

388

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

valid objection to the enlargement or change of national
jurisdiction in this respect, as will appear from an inspection
of the Constitution as it now stands. The power already
exists over the internal police of the States so far as to protect alcohol as property for all purposes for which it can be
manufactured and transported. The constitution now interferes with the internal police of every State which may
desire to banish liquor from its borders for the public good,
by protecting every other State which sees fit to encourage
the traffic in the production and transportation of this substance as a commodity of legitimate commerce, and compels
each State to allow its importation in bulk from foreign
countries and other States, and when once within the territorial limits of a State you can no more pi'event its distribution through the dram-shop than you can arrest the progress
of the storm by a geographical line. So it is that the Constitution already does interfere in the most potent and specific
manner with the internal police of the States upon this allimportant subject.
Thus it appears, first, that the evil can only be efiectually
reached by national legislation, and, second, that such legislation must be of a constitutional character. It further
appears that this is the assertion of no new power over the
internal police of the States. It is only a modification, for
the general welfare, of a power already possessed by the
national government, which is now being exercised to the
destruction of the efforts of the States to extirpate a prolific
source of pauperism, crime and death. The Constitution of
the United States, as it now is and has been from the beginning, is a law for the unrestricted manufacture, sale, impor
tation, exportation, and internal transportation of intoxicating liquors. It is the great legal fortress of intemperance in
this country to-day. It is not a blank upon this subject. It
is not even a mere license law. But by its recognition of
alcohol as property, which may be made and used and carried and protected for all piirposes in the national domain ;
by its protection of alcohol as an imported article in the
ports and in the Territories of the nation, and by its practical
nullification of State laws, enabling the citizens of a certain
State to erect a public bar protected by the supreme law of

J. Ellen Foster,
President Jf. C. T. C, of Io7ua.

CONSTITUTIONAL

PROHIBITION.

389

the land along every inch of the boundaries of a sister State
which may be struggling to suppress the evil, by smugglingstrong liquors with impunity across the boundaries of States,
and even carrying them everywhere under the Stars and
Stripes, protected if need be by the Army of the Union,
in these ways the Constitution of the United States is now
the great ahnighty obstacle in the way of the temperance
reform in this country.
That Constitution ought in this respect to be changed.
Can it be changed? That is the question, and there is but
one answer. It must he done. No such word us fail should
be allowed in the vocabulary of patriotism. But hoiv ? It
can only be done by public opinion. Intelligence, conscience
and common-sense are the foundations of sound pul)lic
opinion ; and they are the agencies which must be relied
upon to effect the proposed change in the Constitution of
the nation. It must be based upon the intelligent demand
of three-fourths of the States in this Union. How can that
public sentiment be created ? First, there must be an intelligent apprehension of the extent of the evil to be remedied,
and that the nation as such is concerned in it. Second, there
must be a practical measure proposed, wise and just and
efficient, upon which the eflbrts of the people can be concentrated. That measure must be radical in its nature, but it
must not ignore existing rights nor violate the public faith,
nor assail the personal character of those who are engaged
in what the nation recoijnizes, and has recosfnized from the
beginning, as a legitimate business and source of revenue to
the coffers of the country. If the nation has traded in its
own destruction, it must itself wear the hood of shame.
That measure cannot destroy property rights vested in the
public faith without compensation or without giving time
for the diversion of capital to other and less pernicious
industries. But the trade must treat popular agitation as
notice to quit. It must exercise common prudence for the
future.
The slave trade was abolished by a constitutional provision, which, in form, gave it protection for nearly twenty
years. If it had been proposed to make that provision operative at once, the Constitution itself never would have been

390

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

adopted by the American people. That measure must interfere as little as possible with the internal affairs of the States,
leaving to them the enforcement of special laws within their
own borders, subject to the general constitutional restriction.
And, finally, in order to have practical value, it must be one
which, appealing to the intelligence and patriotism of all
classes in the whole country, will have some rational chance
of adoption by the widely diversified interests, prejudices
and sentiments of this vast nation, and of incorporation into
the supreme law of the land. Such a measure I have
endeavored to devise, and, although it may be full of imperfections, Ihave felt some hope that it would turn the attention of greater powers to the subject, and that some plan for
the suppression of this national crime and shame, through a
constitutional inhibition, would be matured. I desire to call
specific attention to those features of this proposed amendment to the Constitution which have commended themselves
to my own judgment, and which I have thought would strike
the public mind with some force.
LEADING

FEATURES

OF

THE

PROPOSED

AMENDMENT.

First, it is a proposed constitutional amendment, and not
a measure of proposed legislation by Congress under the
Constitution as it now is. I think I have already said
enough to show that whatever the nation does to facilitate
the suppression of the evils perpetrated by alcohol must be
accomplished by a change in the Constitution itself.
TIME.

Second. The time when the first clause shall take effect
is so far in the future that vested rio-hts will not suffer at
all ; certainly not essentially. Notice of a quarter of a
century is sufficient to every manufacturer to turn his
attention to other and less harmful pursuits. It is longer
than our fathers gave to the merchant marine of the country
to remove its capital from the slave trade, even if ratified at
once, and ten years are given wdienever ratification may take
place. This will enable every man to wear out his still or
convert his machinery to some beneficial purpose. It will
cover the average period of business life for this entire

FEATURES

OF

THE

AMENDMENT.

391

generation, and I dou})t whether there is a distiller in the
world who desires that his son should follow the pursuit
in w^hieh he himself feels compelled to remain, and the
immediate destruction of which would reduce his family to
beggary. Capital invested in the wholesale and import
trade could be very easily diverted in other directions at
much shorter notice, while the retailer only requires time to
sell out his stock on hand.
I am persuaded that great injustice is often done in public
discussions of this subject by the wholesale denunciations
and uncharitable, not to say unchristian and even brutal,
epithets which are hurled at the large number of American
citizens who are engaged in one branch or another of the
liquor business. They are men like ourselves, oftentimes
better than those who assail theni, and nothing is gained hy
the effort to reform individuals by lectures which would
disgrace a fish-woman, or to carry great public measures by
scurrilous attacks upon men who folloAV an avocation which,
however hostile to the interests of mankind, is yet intrenched in the Constitution of our country, — a Constitution sanctioned by the names of Washington, Franklin and
INIadison ; and by virtue of the broad provisions of which
we derive the power to attack our fellow-men with a license
of the tongue almost as pernicious to the public welfare as
the license of the traffic in rum. I am satisfied that very
large numbers of men, whose interests are bound up in the
liquor traffic, would themselves gladly co-operate, if they
were not repelled as criminals, with the most ultra advocates
of the temperance cause in some broad measure which, while
it will enable them to avoid pecuniary ruin, will, at the
same time, i)rotect the coming generations from the storm
of fire and brimstone which is pelting ours like that which
fell upon Sodom and Gomorrah and left them at the bottom
of the Dead Sea.
THE

CONSU.AIER.

Again, the consumer, he who complains that you assault
his manhood, his personal liberty, that you lock up his
mouth with a sumptuary law, that }'ou trample upon his
God-given freedom, when you deprive him of his rum,

392

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

whisky, brandy, and gin, when you interfere with his right
to get drunk, to be drunk and to help others to be drunk
like himself, even this man cannot complain, for before the
year 1900 he will be in his grave. And I have never yet
seen the sot, even, who wanted to transmit his right to be
destroyed by strong drink to his son. There is hardly a
victim of intemperance on this continent to-day who will
not vote to save his son from the dreadful appetite which
chains him to his fate. The parental sentiment of the
country will cry out for this amendment, and the instincts
of human nature will crowd to the ballot-boxes of the land
to save the children of the ages to come. I firmly believe
that, if Congress will only give the American people the
opportunity to act on this proposed amendment, it would
win upon a popular vote after two years' discussion.
But there is no form in which the appeal can be made but
by the submission of an amendment from the national
Legislature to the States at large, and why should not the
opportunity be given and the result left with the people
themselves ?
The importation of liquors is now the subject of treaty
stipulation with France and other countries, but we have
the unquestionable right to abrogate these treaties after
reasonable notice. Every nation has this right, and I allude
to it only because I have heard the existence of these
treaties suggested as an obstacle to the adoption of the
amendment.
Again, this resolution proposes to prevent the manufacture. Ithink it is apparent that there can be no permanent temperance reform in this country so long as the
manufacture is free.
I am not aware of the existence of any law in any State
which interferes with the unrestricted manufacture of distilled spirits for every purpose. Whatever is made will be
sold; and, if it is right to regulate or prohibit the sale for
any use, it must be right to regulate or prohibit the manufacture for the same use, and if it is possible to regulate or
prevent the sale after the article has been distributed into
a million localities all over the country, it is comparatively
easy to control the manufacture, which, necessarily, must be

CONSTITUTIONAL

AMENDMENT

AND

STATE

RIGHTS.

393

carried on where large masses of capital are concentrated.
Granted, that individuals will manufacture their own poison, yet they must do it in secret and under such difficulties
and public reprobation that comparatively small injury could
result. And if it is possible to regulate the sale, and successfully, or even with approximate success, to restrict the
sale to legitimate and necessaiy uses in detached States, as
has been so largely done even under all the embarrassments
of existing laws and a public sentiment none too sensitive
and never hereafter to be less so than now, how much
easier will it be to regulate and control the manufacture by
licenses from the States or from the general ijovernment,
as should be found best in practice. Especially would this
be so when, by the control of transportation, every particle
made could be traced to the proper and authorized dealers
or custodians tiiroughout the country. It would be impossible to conceal the manufacture if carried on to any injurious extent. Nothing can reach, the manufacturer but a
constitutional amendment, for two reasons : first, as before
observed, the Constitution now recognizes ardent spirits for
all uses to be property, and, second, no matter how strictly
any State law might provide for its suppression, capital
could locate in some other jurisdiction, in some other State
or Territory, or in some foreign state, and create the supply
which the drinking appetite of the consumer demands.
Nor can there be any valid objection to this legislation
based upon the doctrine of State rights, for the Constitution
now asserts and exercises the power to substantially control
or thwait the police power of the States by rendering
nugatory their efforts to regulate and suppress the evil.
The police powers of the States are thus really nullified or
abridged in a most important, nay a matter of vital, concern. The deadliest foe of social happiness and public
order is placed under the protection of the national Constitution, and the State must subordinate its process to the
rights of rum, protected by the national power. This
amendment proposes to repeal those restrictions upon the
rights of States to govern themselves, and substitute provisions in harmony with the tendencies of enlightened State
legislation and the interests of society, and thus it proposes

394

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVE3IENT.

to re-enforce the police power of the States acting for the
public good. This certainly, at the worst, is no greater
restriction of the powers of the States than now exists in
the Constitution by virtue of the protection given to the
liquor interests against which the States, so man}' of them,
wage war. And it is difficult to see why an advocate of
States' rights should be* satisfied with the Constitution as
it is, and then complain when it is proposed to change the
Constitution so as to give the States still greater power to
restrict and control an evil over which, but ybr this Constitution, the States would have absolute power.
It seems to me that this is a sufficient reply to those who,
claiming that they desire to suppress the evil, object to an
increase of State power for that purpose. If the real difficulty is that the objector would relieve the liquor traffic of
all legal disabilities, whether State or national, then this
view of States' rights will not be satisfactory. He will then
be satisfied with no constitutional amendment which does not
destroy all " police power," State or national, to interfere
with the evils of alcoholic intemperance. " States' rights "
is a term too much abused in these latter days, and honest
men should examine well the motives and pretenses of those
who appeal to prejudices engendered by controversies which,
with their causes, are vanished away. We certainly are a
nation to such extent that a vast evil which contaminates
the atmosphere of the continent can be assailed with national power, especially when it can be reached successfully
in no other way, and the method proposed leaves to the
States the execution of the great work if they will perform
it in their own self-chosen way.
But I would not fail to urge that there be no national
action at the expense of that which otherwise would be done
in the States. The two forms of agitation and legislation
should go on together, and each as the ally of the other, promoting, bytheir joint action, the success of both, fortifying
and securing their conquests when made.
In the same campaigns we discuss both State and national
issues. Why is it not easier and better to consider the issue
against alcohol in its broad and national aspect, which is the
reall}^ important and only decisive one, rather than wholly in

THE

NATIONAL

ASPECT.

395

its local and lesser relations in States, counties and towns?
At the same primaries we select botli State and national
candidates, or choose delegates to act for us in conventions
which perform our will. Why not, then, see to it that
national candidates are sound upon the temperance issue,
as well as those who are to be officers only of the State ?
Xo more important questions ever arise in Congress than
questions upon bills and resolutions which relate to traffic in
alcohol, and yet we ignore them in the formation of national
platforms, and in the choice of candidates for the exercise of
the executive and legislative power.
The movements of the present time for prohil)itory amendments of State constitutions and for statutory prohibition and
regulation, including the sj'stem of "local-option" effort, are
of great importance, especially as the means of temporary
restraint, and as the centers of agitation and means of creating enlightened public opinion ; but such is the nature and
scope of the evil, and such are the relations of the general
and special or State governments to each other, that nothing
but a movement based upon the national idea presents a clear
prospect of permanent success. The same and greater difficulties arise in all action for the permanent or even temporary
suppression of the liquor traffic that does not include aggressive co-operation of the national government, which ruined
the country under the Articles of Confederation, and which
did not abate until the whole subject of commerce, foreign
and between the States, was placed under the control of one
sovereign power. The combination of local and national
effort is indispensable to the desired end. Xeither can prevail without the other : neither can be postponed for the other
without harm. Let everybody throw a stone at the liquor
traffic, each in his own way, when he is so organized that he
can not or will not use prepared ammunition nor shoot with
the reijulation ofun.
But still the fact will remain that to ignore or delay the
movement for a prohibitory amendment of the national Constitution, so that it may be reserved to be a Yorktown rather
than a Bunker Hill — that is to say, a crowning rather than a
preliminary battle — is to decide to fight as a mass of individuals, or an isolation of States, rather than as a trained

396

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

anny with a general plan of campaign, and a national concentration of organized power for the destruction of an
organized national curse.
It is a division and misdirection of power where combination and definite aim are required to give substantial success.
It is time that the prohibitory idea should assume that control of any national party which belongs to a sentiment which
is the conviction of three-fourths of the people in that party.
No party can remain permanently three-fourths for prohibition and one-fourth against it. That is less possible than
it once was for the nation to remain permanently half slave
and half free. Ideas never compromise. They contend for
mastery, but they never conciliate nor coalesce. We are at
the dividing of the ways :
" The ci'isis presses on us.
Face to face with us it stands,
With its solemn lips of question,
Like the Sphinx on Egypt's sands."
Our generation is passing away. Let not those of us who
have chiefly done our work forget that the nation will survive
us, and that the tree of liberty will be full of sap after we
are gone. Let us die in the direction of hope. If the victory come not in our time, nor to our advantage, let those
who bury us have reason to embalm our hearts, that in the
thick fight wdiich is between us and the Holy Land, chieftains who command our children shall, like the crusader, cast
the sacred relics far forward into the ranks of the foe. So
may the armies of the cross win victories from the memory
of our devotion to the right.
Let us at least leave behind the example of unflinching
and unselfish valor put forth in a sublime cause — a cause
which it is duty to uphold, even though complete success
may linger until our warfare is ended, and our sacrifices and
calamities, if any there be, endured for its promotion, shall
be long overpast.

CHAPTER
WOMAN

SUFFRAGE

AND

XIX.
TEMPERANCE

REFORM.

Woman's Kingdom, the Home, at Stake — Woman the Greatest Barrier
to Intemperance — Temperance is AVoman's War — Rum Destroys
the Home — Suftrage of Woman Indispensable to the Temperance
Reform — Human Suffrage the True Ideal — Woman Suffrage Discussed— Senate Committee's Report on Suffrage of Woman —
Woman's Christian Temperance Union, an Illustration of Woman's
Ability to Shape Action — Ouida's Notions about Women — Intelligent Men Concede Woman's Cajjacity and Moral Fitness — Suffrage
not a Right Dependent on Sex — To Vote the Great Primitive Right
— Maternity does not Disqualify; Motherhood adds Motives —
Mothers can Attend Chui'ch, why not the Polls? — Objection that
Woman does not Desire Suffrage — Objection that Husband and
Wife will Disagree — Experience of Wyoming, Washington, and
Kansas — AVomen Voting has made Voting Respectable — Senate
Report, on Development of Woman Suffrage — School Suffrage in
Eleven States — Speech of Hon. Albert Griffm — Free Suffrage
for All.
THE worst consequences of the liquor traffic fall upon
women and children.
Intemperance is the most cowardly of all crimes.

I say of

all c?n'wies ; for it must be admitted that if so long as the
effects of self-poisonins: by the use of intoxicating beverages
are confined to the drunkard, the practice is only a vice, yet
the moment that he is led by it to violate his duty to others,
and trespass upon their rights, he becomes a criminal. Although there is much intemperance among women, and it is
to be feared that the habit is increasing, especially among the
fast and wealthy few, still the gentler sex is comparatively
free from the dreadful practice, which is so common among
men. Some of the reasons for this fact may be that the
woman nature, if not the better, is less inclined to the indulgence of coarse animal tendencies, like gluttony and drunkenness, that woman has fewer temptations, and, when there is
opportunity, is more readily reclaimed. Then, again, woman
is the supreme being in the family,
397 and instinctively perseveres

398

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

longest against temptation, adversity and unfortunate environment, inthe effort to sustain and preserve the family bark
from wreck on the sea of dissipation. All the intense feelinofs and forces of w^ifehood and motherhood are rallied for
the great struggle against the drink demon who invades her
sacred citadel. Whoever surrenders to him, — and sometimes
he captures all and spares neitlier age nor sex, — as a rule,
the woman who is wife and mother yields last.
Intemperance is not a natural passion. It is an acquired
appetite ; and woman, warned of its special horrors reserved
for herself, is the greatest barrier to its general prevalence
amonof men. Imao-ine for a moment the influence of woman
withdrawn from the warfare against alcohol ; or even that
she were as indifferent and inactive in her opposition to it as
the masses of the other sex ! — Would not the ravages of the
traffic be doubled in five years?
Men alone would seldom lose a day or a dollar in temperance crusades. The war for abstinence is a war for woman
and for home. It is woman's war. Man may help her. But
she fights it, if it be fought, and she wins it, if it be won.
It is her kingdom which is at stake, and upon her success
depend all the great interests of society.
There can be no doubt that the spiritual fiber of woman's
organization is of a higher type than that of man. She is
more closely allied with the moral and religious elements or
forces in the universe — with these qualities in the Great
Source of everything. This is one of the differences between
the sexes, and, like physical strength, is one not of kind but
of deo-ree.
Man possesses more of body. It is not clear that he has
the stronger mind ; and his moral or spiritual nature is as much
the weaker as his physical is superior to that of woman. So
far, he has had the better opportunity, for superior strength
has enabled him to seize it, and brute selfishness has led him
to do it. So the history of woman has been that of dependence — generally of slavery, for both pets and drudges are
alike slaves — just as the refined and spiritual and good have
been crucified on every Calvary, from the earliest ages, by the
tyranny of physical force.
Woman in history has the same relation to man in history

4

wo3ian's enfranchisement

the era of reason.

399

that the purer and the better side of human nature has
always sustained toward its less refined and material tendencies. And as in the evolution of the ages spirit eventually vanquishes matter, the soul the body, right conquers
wrong, and the pure and holy are victorious over all, and
assert a supremacy -which destro3's nothing that should continue, and chastens selfishness only so far as to convert its
streno-th into a source of s^ood, elevatins; and refininsf and
preserving those qualities which unrestrained have tjn-annized
and destroyed, so in the higher and holier and happier ages
upon which we are now surely entering, the complete enfranchisement ofwoman is the primal condition and basic
fact which will mark the era of the dominance of reason and
conscience in the affairs of the race.
But, even if this were not so, the very selfishness of woman
compels her to be the enemy of rum ; for rum destroys her
home as the serpent despoils the mother-bird of her brood.
While I believe that "ever the right comes uppermost, and
that ever is justice done," and that the various forces of
" moral suasion " would in the end remove the liquor traffic,
yet it takes too long — too many ages — and we cannot wait.
And again, it is a part of the order of nature that the
ruling force in society should emijody itself in law. Government isa natural institution, although in its forms it may
be modified by the will of men. "When society is informed
of any great evil and of the remedy, it will remove that evil
if it be strons: enouo-h to do it. The evil of alcoholic intoxication is one of the greatest which have ever afflicted humanity. Society is becoming informed of this fact, and is
anxiously endeavoring to remove it ; so far with but partial
success. Public sentiment has already in many cases taken
on the form of laws which, being defective or defectively
executed, have failed — some totally, all partially failed.
Why has the law failed ? Why has it been defective ? Why,
when its terms were efficient, has it still failed in execution?
Is there anv force in society not 3'et utilized, and which can
1)6 and therefore must be utilized, in order to give and execute good laws for the destruction of the traffic in poison
drinks? I believe that the sufirage of woman is indispensable to the success of the temperance reform.

400

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

But I know that suffrage will never be given to woman in
so important a matter as this, unless by the concession of the
correctness of a principle, which, if granted, will sooner or
later confer complete freedom in the exercise of suffrage upon
womanhood just as it is exercised by man. When this is
done, we shall hear, not of manhood suffrage nor of womanhood suffrage, but of soul-suffrage. In the soul is the source
of the right ; and whoever has a mature human soul is, under
our form of government, entitled to human suffrage. Human
suffrage is its true name.
Let us baptize it thus.
Therefore, it becomes necessary to examine briefly the
general subject of the suffrage, since we cannot hope nor do
we care for its concession to woman to be api)lied to one
purpose alone, however important that purpose may be.
FOUNDATION

OF

THE

RIGHT

OF

SUFFRAGE.

If there be any principle upon which our form of government is founded, and wherein it is different from aristocracies,
monarchies and despotisms, that principle is this :
Every human being of mature powers, not disqualified by
ignorance, vice or crime, is the equal of and is entitled to all
the rights and privileges which belong to any other such
human being under the law.
The independence, equality and dignity of all human souls
is the fundamental assertion of those who believe in what we
call human freedom. This principle will hardly be denied by
any one, even by those who oppose the extension of suffrage
to women. But we are informed that infants, idiots and
women are represented by men. This cannot reasonably be
claimed unless it be first shown that the consent of these
classes has been given to such representation, or that they
lack the capacity to consent. But the exclusion of these
classes from participation in the government deprives them
of the poAver of assent to representation even when they possess the requisite ability ; and to say there can be representation which does not presuppose consent or authority on the
part of the principal who is represented, is to confound all
reason, and to assert, in substance, that all actual power,
whether despotic or otherwise, is representative, and there-

M7^s. Z.

G.

ii aUacc,

Superintende?it Franchise Dcp't, Natio?ial W. C. T. U.

BASIS

OF

RIGHT

OF

SUFFRAGE.

401

fore free. In this sense the Czar represents his whole people,
just as voting men represent women who do not vote at all.
True it is that the voting men, by excluding women and
other classes from the suffrage, by that act charge themselves
with the trust of administering justice to all, even as the
monarch whose power is based upon force is bound to rule
uprightly. But if it be true that " all just government is
founded upon the consent of the governed," then the government of woman by man, without her consent, given in her
sovereign capacity, if, indeed, she be an intelligent creature,
and provided she be competent to exercise the power of suffrage, which is the sovereignty, even if that government be
wise and just in itself, is a violation of natural right, and an
enforcement of servitude and slavery against her on the part
of man. If woman, like the infant or the defective classes,
be incapable of self-government, then republican society may
exclude her from all participation in the enactment and
enforcement of the laws under which she lives. But in that
case, like the infant and the fool and the unconsenting subject
of tyrannical forms of government, she is ruled and not represented byman.
Thus much I desire to say in the beginning, in reply to the
broad assumption of those who den}' women the suffrage by
saying that they are alread}^ represented by their fathers, their
husbands, their brothers, and their sous, or to state the proposition in its only proper form, that woman, whose assent can
only be given by an exercise of sovereignty on her part, is
represented by man, who denies and by virtue of power and
possession refuses to her the exercise of the suffrage whereby
that representation can be made valid.
The claim, then, that woman is represented by the other
sex is not well founded, and is based upon the same assumption of power which lies at the base of all government antirepublican in form. It can not be claimed that she is, as a
free being, already represented, for she can only be represented according to her will by the exercise of her will
through the suffrage itself.
As already observed, the exclusion of woman from the
suffrage under our form of government can be justified upon
proof, and 26
only upon proof, that by reason of her sex she

402

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

is incompetent to exercise that power. This is a question
of fact.
The common ground upon which all agree may be stated
thus : All males having certain qualifications are in reason and
in law entitled to vote. Those qualifications affect either the
body or the mind, or both.
First, the attainment of a certain age. The age, in itself,
is not material, but maturity of mental and moral development is material, soundness of body, in itself, not being
essential, and want of it alone never working forfeiture of
the right, although it may prevent its exercise.
Age, as a qualification for suffrage, is by no means to be
confounded with age as a qualification for service in war.
Society has well established the distinction, and that one has
no relation whatever to the other ; the one having reference
to physical prowess, while the other relates only to the mental
and moral state. This is shown by the ages fixed by law for
these qualifications, that of eighteen years being fixed as the
commencement of the term of presumed fitness for military
service, and forty-five years as the period of its termination ;
while the age of presumed fitness for the sufirage, which
requires no physical superiority certainly, is set at twentyone years, when still greater strength of body has been
attained than at the period when liability to the dangers and
hardships of war commences ; and there are at least three
million more male voters in our country than of the population liable by law to the performance of military duty. It
is still further to be observed that the ris^ht of suffrage continues as long as the mind lasts, while ordinary liability to
military service ceases at a period when the physical powers,
though still strong, are beo-innino^ to wane. The truth is
that there is no legal or natural connection between the rio'ht
or liability to fight and the right to vote.
The right to fight may be exercised voluntarily, or the liability to fight may be enforced by the community whenever
there is an invasion of right, and the extent to which the
physical forces of society may be called upon in self-defense,
or in justifiable revolution, is measured not by age or sex,
but by necessity, and may go so far as to call into the field
old men and women and the last vestige of physical force.

QUALIFICATIONS

OF

SUFFRAGE.

403

It can not be claimed that woman has no rio'ht to vote because
she is not liable to fight, for she is so liable ; and the freest
government on the face of the earth has the reserved power,
under the call of necessity, to place her in the forefront of
battle itself; and, more than this, woman has the right, and
often has exercised it, to go there.
If any one could question the existence of this reserved
power of society to call the force of Avoman to the common
defense, either in the hospital or the field, it would be woman,
who has been deprived of participation in the government
and in shaping the public policy which has resulted in dire
emergency to the State. But in all times, and under all forms
of government and of social existence, woman has given her
body and her soul to the common defense.
The qualification of age, then, is imposed for the purpose
of securing mental and moral fitness for the suff'rage on the
part of those who exercise it. It has no relation to the possession of physical powers at all.
All other qualifications imposed upon male citizens, save
only that of their sex, as prerequisites to the exercise of suffrage, have the same objects in view, and can have no other.
The propert}'^ qualification is, to my mind, an inva.sion of
natural right, which elevates mere property to an equalit}'"
with life and personal liberty, and ought never to be imposed
upon the suffrage. But, however that may be, its application
or removal has no relation to sex, and its only object is to
secure the exercise of the suffrage under a stronger sense of
obligation and responsibility — a qualification, be it observed,
of no consequence save as it influences the mind of the voter
in the exercise of his right.
The, same is true of the qualifications of sanity, education,
and obedience to the laws, which exclude dementia, ignorance
and crime from participation in the sovereignty. Every condition or qualification imposed upon the exercise of the suffrage by the citizens, save only sex, has for its only object or
possible justification the possession of mental and moral fitness, and has no relation to physical power.
The question then arises. Why is the qualification of masculinity requii-ed at all ?
The distinction between human beings by reasons of sex is

404

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

a physical distinction. The soul is of no sex. If there be a
distinction of soul, by reason of the physical difference, or
accompanying that physical difference, woman is the superior
of man in mental and moral qualities. In proof of this see
all the eulogiums of woman pronounced by those who, like
the serpent of old, would flatter her vanity that they may
continue to wield her power.
I repeat it that the soul is of no sex, and that sex is, so
far as the possession and exercise of human rights and powers
are concerned, but a physical property, in which the female
is just as important as the male, and the possessor thereof
under just as great need of power in the organization and
management of society, and the government of society, as
man ; and if there be a difference, she, by reason of her
average physical inferiority, is really protected, and ought to
be protected, by a superior mental and moral fitness to give
direction to the course of society and the policy of the State.
If, then, there be a distinction between the souls of human
beings resulting from sex, I claim that, by the universal testimony of all men, woman is better fitted for the exercise of
the suffrage than man.
It is claimed by some that the suffrage is an inherent
natural right, and by others that it is merely a privilege
extended to the individual by society in its discretion.
However this may be, practically any extension of the
exercise of the suffrage to individuals or classes not now
enjoying it, must be by concession of those who already
possess it, and such extension without revolution will be
through the suffrage itself, exercised by those who have it
under existins^ forms.
The appeal by those who have it not must be made to
those who are asked to part with a portion of their own
power, and it is not strange that human nature, which is an
essential element in the male sex, should hesitate and delay
to yield one-half its power to those whose cause, however
strong in reason and justice, lacks that physical force which
so largely has been the means by which the masses of men
themselves have wrung their own rio:hts from rulers and
kings.
Give woman justice, or a chance to take what belongs to

woman's title to the franchise.

405

her, if she wants to. After that we can talk oi protection,
if she needs it. Will woman be less attractive, because she
can vote ? Will she be less of a necessity or less of a luxury
in human affairs ? If she can do so much without the l)allot,
what could she not accomplish with it ? It is a false pretense
that men withhold the ballot for her sake ; it is for their own.
It is greed of power — poor, mean jealousy of woman in fair,
open competition, and fear of subjugation trom reduction to
our own aliquot part of power in society. That is what ails
us men. Eye-rolling ranters about the angelic sweetness of
woman, etc., and the contamination of the ballot should have
their feelings submitted to chemical analysis.
It is not strange that when overwhelmed with argument
and half won by appeals to his better nature to concede to
woman her equal power in the State, and ashamed to blankly
refuse that which he finds no reason for longer withholding,
man avoids the dilemma by a pretended elevation of his helpmeet to a higher sphere, where, as an angel, she has certain
gauzy ethereal resources and superior functions, occupations
and attributes which render the possession of mere earthly
every-day powers and privileges non-essential to woman,
however mere mortal men themselves ma}^ find them indispensable to their own freedom and happiness.
But to the denial of her right to vote, whether that denial
be the blunt refusal of the ignorant or tlie polished evasion
of the refined courtier and politician, Avoman can oppose only
her most solemn and perpetual appeal to the reason of man
and to the justice of Almighty God. She must continually
point out the nature and object of the suffrage, and the
necessity that she possess it for her own and the public good.
What, then, is the suffrage, and avthy is it necessary
that woman should possess and exercise this function
of freemen?
I will quote briefly from the report of the majority of
the Senate Committee on Woman Suffrage, which I had the
honor to submit during the first session of the 49th Congress :
The rights for the maintenance of which human governments
are constituted are life, liberty and property. These rights are
common to men and Avomen alike, and whatever citizen or subject

406

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

exists as a member of any body-politic, under any form of government, is entitled to demand from the sovereign power the full
protection of these rights.
This right to the protection of rights appertains to the individual, not to the family alone, or to any form of association, whether
social or corporate. Probably not more than five-eighths of the
men of legal age, qualified to vote, are heads of families, and not
more than that proportion of adult women are united with men in
the legal merger of married life. It is, therefore, quite incorrect
to speak of the State as an aggregate of families duly represented
at the ballot-box by their male head. The relation between the
government and the individual is direct ; all rights are individual
rights, all duties are individual duties.
Government in its two highest functions is legislative and
judicial. By these powers the sovereignty prescribes the law,
and directs its application to the vindication of rights and the
redress of wrongs. Conscience and intelligence are the only
forces which enter into the exercise of this highest and primary
function of government. The remaining department is the executive or administi-ative, and in all forms of government — the
republican as well as in tyranny — the primary element of administi'ation is force, and even in this department conscience and intelligence are indispensable to its direction.
If, now, we are to decide who of our sixty millions of human
beings are to constitute the citizenship of this republic, and by
virtue of their qualifications to be the law-making power, by what
tests shall the selection be determined?
The suffrage, which is the sovereignty, is this great primary lawmaking power. It is not the executive power proper at all. It is
not founded upon force. Only that degree of physical strength
which is essential to a sound body — the home of the healthy
mental and moral constitution — the sound soul in the sound body
is required in the performance of the function of primary legislation. Never in the history of this or any other genuine republic
has the law-making power, whether in general elections or in the
framing of laws in legislative assemblies, been vested in individuals who have exercised it by reason of their physical powers.
On the contrary, the physically weak have never for that reason
been deprived of the suffrage nor of the privilege of service in
the public councils so long as they possessed the necessary powers
of locomotion and expression, of conscience and intelligence,
which are common to all. The aged and the physically weak
have, as a rule, by reason of superior wisdom and moral sense,
far more than made good any bodily inferiority by which they

U. S. SENATE REPORT ON SUFFRAGE.

407

have differed from the more robust members of the community in the discussion and decisions of the ballot-box and in the
councils of State.
The executive power of itself is a mere physical instrumentality
— an animal quality — and it is confided from necessity to those
individuals who possess that quality, but always with danger,
except so far as wisdom and virtue control its exercise. And it is
obvious that the greater the mass of higher and spiritual forces,
whether found in those to whom the execution of the law is
assigned, or in the great mass by whom the suffrage is exercised,
and who direct the execution of the law, the greater will be the
safety and the surer will be the happiness of the State.
It is too late to question the intellectual and moral capacity of
woman to understand great political issues (which are always
primarily questions of conscience — questions of the intelligent
application of the principles of right and of wrong in public and
private affairs) and properly decide them at the polls. Indeed, so
far as your committee are aware, the pretense is no longer advanced that woman should not vote by reason of her mental or
moral unfitness to perform this legislative function ; but the suffrage isdenied to her because she can not hang criminals, suppress
mobs, nor handle the enginery of war. We have already seen
the untenable nature of this assumption, because those who make
it bestow the suffrage upon very large classes of men who, however well qualified they may be to vote, are physically unable to
perform any of the duties which appertain to the execution of
the law and the defense of the State. Scarcely a senator on this
floor is liable by law to perform a military or other administrative
duty, yet the rule so many set up against the right of women to
vote would disfranchise nearly this whole body.
But it is unnecessary to grant that woman can not fight. History is full of examples of her heroism in danger, of her endurance and fortitude in trial, and of her indispensable and supreme
service in hospital and field ; and in the handling of the deft and
horrible machinery and infernal agencies which science and art
have prepared, and are preparing for human destruction in future
wars, woman may perform her whole part in the common assault
or the common defense. It is hardly worth while to consider this
trivial objection that she is incompetent for purposes of national
murder or of bloody self-defense as the basis of the denial of a
great fundamental right, when we consider that if that right were
given to her she would by its exercise almost certainly abolish this
great crime of the nations, which has always inflicted upon her
the chief burden of woe.

408

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

It will be admitted that the act of voting is operative in
government only as a means of deciding upon the adoption
or rejection of measures or of the selection of officers to
enact, administer, and execute the laws.
It also must be admitted that in the discharo^e of these
functions intelligence and conscience are the faculties requisite to secure their proper performance.
In this day, when woman has demonstrated that she is fully
the intellectual equal of man in the profound as well as in the
politer walks of learning — in art, science, literature, and,
considering her opportunities, that she is not his inferior in
any of the professions or in the great mass of useful occupations, while she is, in fact, becoming the chief educator of
the race, and is the acknowledged support of the great ministrations ofcharity and religion ; when in such great organizations as the suffrage associations, missionary societies,
the National Woman'' s Christian Temperance Union, and
even upon the still larger scale of international action, she
has exhibited her power by mere moral influences and the
inspiration of great purposes, without the aid of legal penalties or even of tangible inconveniences, to mould and direct
the discordant thought and action of thousands and millions
of people scattered over separate States, and sometimes even
living in countries hostile to each other, to the accomplishment of great earthly or heavenly ends, it is unreasonable
to deny to woman the sufii-age in political afiairs upon the
false allegation that she is wanting in the very qualities most
indispensable and requisite for the proper exercise of this
great right.
The advocates of universal male sufir'asre have lonsf since
ceased to deny the ballot to woman upon the ground that
she is unfit or incompetent to exercise it.
There is a class of high-stepping objectors, like Ouida, who
decry the sound judgment and moral excellence of woman as
compared with man, but in the same breath these people
deny the sufi"rage to the masses of men, and advocate "the
just supremacy of the fittest," so that no time need be wasted
in refutation of those malignant and libelous aspersions upon
our mothers, sisters and wives, which, when carried to logical conclusions by their own authors, deny the fundamental

Mrs. Ano;ie P. Newman,
Lincobi, Neb.

MATERNITY

NO

DISQUALIFICATION.

principles of liberty to man and woman

409

alike, and reassert

in its baldest form the dogma that " the existing system of
electoral power all over the world is absurd, and will remain
so because in no nation is there the courage, perhaps in no
nation is there the intellectual power, capable of putting forward and sustaining the logical doctrine of the just supremacy of the fittest."
In fact, all honest, intelligent men, who believe in the
republican system of government at all, concede that woman
has the capacity and moral fitness requisite to exercise the
ballot.
There is no escape from it. The discussion has passed so
far that among intelligent people who believe in the
republican form — tRat is, free government — all mature
men and women have under the same circumstances and conditions the same rights to defend, the same grievances to
redress, and, therefore, the same necessity for the exercise
of this great fundamental right of all human beings in free
society. For the right to vote is the great primitive right.
It is the rioht in Avhich all freedom ori2:inates and culminates.
It is the right from which all others spring, in which
they merge, and without which they fall whenever assailed.
This risrht makes, and is all the dificrence between orovernment by and with the consent of the governed and government
without and asfainst the consent of the governed ; and that is
the difference between freedom and slavery. If the right to
vote be not that diflerence, what is? If either sex as a class
can dispense with the right to vote, then take it from the
strong, and no lonirer rob the weak of their defense for the
benefit of the strong.
But it is impossible to conceive of the sufi*rage as a right
dependent at all upon such an irrelevant condition as sex.
It is an individual, a personal right. It may be withheld
by force ; but if withheld by reason of sex it is a moral
robbery.
But it is said that the duties of maternity disqualify for
the performance of the act of voting. It can not be, and, I
think, is not claimed by an}^ one, that the mother, who otherwise would be fit to vote, is rendered mentally or morally
less fit to exercise this high function in the State because of

410

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

motherhood. On the contrary, if any woman has a motive
more than another person, man or woman, to secure the
enactment and enforcement of good laws, it is the mother,
who, beside her own life, person, and property, to the protection of which the ballot is as essential as to the same
rights possessed by man, has her little contingent of immortal beings to conduct safely to the portals of active life
through all the snares and pitfalls woven around them by
bad men, and bad laws which bad men have made, or good
laws which bad men, unhindered by the good, have defied or
have prostituted, and rightly to prepare them for the discharge of all the duties of their day and generation, including the exercise of the very right denied to their mother.
Certainly, if but for motherhood she ^should vote, then ten
thousand times more necessary is it that the mother should
be guarded and armed with this great social and political
power, for the sake of all men and women who are yet to be.
But it is said that she has not the time. Let us see. By
the best deductions I can make from the census and from
other sources there are 15,000,000 women of voting age in
this country at the present time, of whom not more than 10,000,000 are married, and not more than 7,500,000 are still
liable to the duties of maternity, for it will be remembered that
a large proportion of the mothers of our country at any given
time are below the voting age, while of those who are above
it another large proportion have passed beyond the point of
this objection. Not more than one-half the female population of voting age are liable to this objection. Then, why
disfranchise the 7,500,000, the other half, as to whom your
objection, even if valid as to any, does not apply at all ; and
these, too, as a class the most mature, and therefore the best
qualified to vote of any of their sex ? But how much is there
of this objection of want of time or physical strength to vote
in its application to women who are bearing and training the
coming millions ? The families of the country average five
persons in number. If we assume that this gives an average
of three children to every pair, which is probably the full
number, or if we assume that every married mother, after
she becomes of votino- ao:e, bears three children, which is
certainly the full allowance, and that twenty-four years are

MOTHERHOOD

A

REASON

FOR

SUFFRAGE.

411

consumed in doing it, there is one child born every eight
years, whose coming is to interfere with the exercise of a
duty or privilege which, in most States, and in all the most
important elections, occurs only one day in two years.
That same mother will attend church at least forty times
yearly, on the average, from her cradle to her grave, 'beside
an infinity of other social, religious, and industrial obligations
which she performs and assumes to perform because she is a
married woman and a mother, rather than for any other reason whatever. Yet it is proposed to deprive women — yes,
all women alike — of an inestimable privilege and the chief
power which can be exercised by any free individual in the
State, for the reason that on any given day of election not
more than one w^oman in twenty of voting age will probably
not be able to reach the polls. It does seem probable that on
these interestinsf occasions if the husband and wife disagree
in politics they could arrange a pair, and the probability is,
that arrangement failing, one could be consummated with
some other lady in like fortunate circumstances of opposite
political opinions. More men are kept from the polls by
drunkenness, or, being at the polls, vote under the influence
of strong drink, to the reproach and destruction of our free
institutions, and who, if woman could and did vote, would
cast the ballot of sobriety, good order, and reform, under
her holy influences, than all those who would be kept from
any given election by the necessary engagements of mothers
at home.
When one thinks of the innumerable and trifling causes
which keep many of the best of men and strongest opponents
of woman suffi-age from the polls upon important occasions,
it is difiicult to be tolerant of the objection that woman, by
reason of motherhood, has no time to vote. The greater
exposure of man to the casualties of life actually disables
him in such way as to make it physically impossible for him
to exercise the franchise more frequently than is the case
with women, including mothers and all. And if this liability
to lose the opportunity to exercise the right once or possibly
twice in a lifetime is a reason that women should not be
allowed to vote at all, why should men not be disfranchised
also by the same rule ?

412

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

But it is urged that woman does not desire the privilege.
If the right exist at all, it is an individual right, and not one
which belongs to a class or to the sex as such. Yet men tell
us that they will vote the suffrage to women whenever the
majority of women desire it. Are, then, our rights the
property of the majority of a disfranchised class to which
we may chance to belong ? What would we say if it were
seriously proposed to recall the suffrage from all colored or
from all white men because a majority of either class should
decline or for any cause fail to vote ? I know that it is said
that the suffrage is a privilege to be extended by those who
have it to those who have it not. But the matter of right,
of moral right, to the franchise does not depend upon the
indifference of those who possess it, or of those who do not
possess it, to the desire of those women who wish to enjoy
their right and to discharge their duty. If one or many
choose not to claim their right, it is no argument for depriving
me of mine, or one woman of hers. There are many reasons
why some women declare themselves opposed to the extension of suffrage to their sex. Some well fed and pampered,
without serious experiences in life, are incapable of comprehending the subject at all. Vast numbers, who secretly and
earnestly desire it, from the long habit of deference to the
wishes of the other sex, upon whom they are so entirely
dependent while disfranchised, and knowing the hostility of
their " protectors " to the agitation of the subject, conceal
their real sentiments, and the " lord " of the family, referring
this question to his wife, who has heard him sneer, or worse
than sneer, at suffragists for half a lifetime, ought not to
expect an answer which she knows will subject her to his
censure and ridicule, or even his unexpressed disapprobation.
It is like the old appeal of the master to his slave, to know
if he would be free. Full well did the wise and wary slave
know that happiness depended upon declared contentment
with his lot. But, all the same, the world does move. Colored men are free. Colored men vote. Women will vote.
If colored women vote, their votes will be cast quite as
intelligently as those of colored men. There will be one
million of them.
White women will vote, and there are two

SCHISM

IN

FAIVIILIES.

413

of them to one colored woman all through the South, and in
the whole country ten times as many. How, then, is the
quality of the sufii'age to be injured by reason of color,
unless the white color is the inferior? The suggestion is
dishonorable. To such paltry talk are the opponents of
woman suffrage driven by the truth. A little further on,
I shall revert to the evidence of a oreneral and ofrowinff
desire on her part, and on the part of just and intelligent
men, that the suffrage be extended to women.
But we are told that husband and wife will disagree, and
thus the suffrage will destroy the family and ruin society. If
a married couple Avill quarrel at all, they will lind the occasion, and it were fortunate indeed if their contention might
concern important affairs. There is no peace in the family
save where love is, and the same spirit which enables the
husband and wife to enforce the toleration act between themselves in religious matters will keep the peace between
them in political discussions. At all events, this argument
is unworthy of notice at all, unless we are to push it to its
logical conclusion, and, for the sake of peace in the family,
to prohibit woman absolutely the exercise of freedom of
thought and speech. Men live with their countrymen, and
disagree with them in politics, religion, and ten thousand of
the affairs of life, as often the trifling as the important.
What harm, then, if woman be allowed her thought and vote
upon the tariff, education, temperance, peace and war, and
whatsoever else the suffrage decides ?
But we are told that no government, of which we have
authentic history, ever gave to woman a share in the sovereignty.
This is not true, for the annals of monarchies and despotisms have been rendered illustrious by queens of surpassing
brilliance and power. But even if it be true that no republic
ever enfranchised woman with the ballot, even so, until within
one hundred years, universal or even general sufl'rage was
unknown among men.
Has the millennium yet dawned ? Is all progress at an end ?
If that which is should therefore remain, why abolish the
slavery of men?
But we are informed that woman does not vote when she

414

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

has the opportunity. Wherever she has the unrestricted
right she exercises it. The records of W^^oming and Washington and Kansas demonstrate the fact.
And in these parts of the country, too, as well as wherever
else she has exercised the suffrage, she has elevated man to
her own level, and has made the voting precinct as respectable and decorous as the lecture-room or the assemblies of
the devout. All the experience there is refutes the apprehension of those who fear that woman will either neglect the
discharge of her great duty, when allowed its fair and equal
exercise, or that the rude and baser sort will overwhelm and
banish the noble and refined.
But, to my mind, it seems like trifling with a great subject
to dwell upon topics like this. It can only be justified by
the continual iteration of the objection by the opponents of
woman suffrage, who, in the lack of substantial grounds
whereupon to base their opposition to the exercise of a great
right by one-half the community, declare that there is notime in which woman can vote.
The following is an extract from the report of the majority
of the Senate Committee before cited, showing, to a certain
extent, the degree of consequence which this movement has
assumed, its extent throughout our country, and something
of its duration. Since this report was compiled, there has
been action in several States, notably in Kansas, where
municipal suffrage has been a complete success, and a great
deal of popular discussion, and a vast amount of demonstration, from the action of popular assemblies.
The Committee say ;
" This movement for woman suffrage has developed, during the
last half-century, into one of great strength. The first petition
was presented to the Legislature of New York in 1835. It was
repeated in 1846, and since that time the petition has been urged
upon nearly every Legislature in the Northern States. Five
States have voted upon the question of amending their Constitutions by striking out the word ' male ' from the suffrage clause —
Kansas in 1867, Michigan in 1874, Colorado in 1877, Nebraska in
1882, and Oregon in 1884.
" The ratio of the popular vote in each case was about one-third
for the amendment and two-thirds against it. Three Territories

THE SENATE

REPORT

ON SUFFRAGE.

415

have, or have had, full suffrage for women. In two — Wyoming
since 1869 and Washington since 1883 — the experiment (!) is an
unqualified success. In Utah, Miss Anthony keenly and justly
observes that suffrage is as much of a success for the Mormon
women as for the men.
" In eleven States, school suffrage for women exists. In Kansas,
from her admission as a State. In Kentucky and Michigan fully
as long a time. School suffrage for women also exists in Colorado,
Minnesota, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Vermont, New York,
Nebraska, and Oregon.
" In all these States, except Minnesota, school suffrage was
extended to women by the respective Legislatures, and in Minnesota bythe popular vote in November, 1876. Not only these
eleven States, but in nearly all the other Northern and Western
States, women are elected to the offices of county and city superintendents of public schools, and as members of school-boards.
In Louisiana, the Constitution of 1879 makes women eligible to
school offices.
"It may also be observed, as indicating a rising and controlling
public sentiment in recognition of the right and capacity of
woman for public affairs, tliat she is eligible to such offices as that
of county clerk, register of deeds, and the like, in many and perhaps in all the States. Kansas and Iowa elected several women
to these positions in the election of November, 1885, while President Grant alone appointed more than five thousand women to the
office of postmaster; and although many women have been
appointed in the Dej^artments, and to pension agencies and like
important employments and trusts, so far as your Committee are
aware, no charge of incompetency or of malfeasance in office has
ever yet been sustained against a woman.
"It may be further stated, in this connection, that nearly every
Northern State has had before it, from time to time since 1870, a
bill for the submission of the question of woman suffrage to the
popular vote. In some instances, such a resolution has been
passed at one session and failed to be ratified at another by from
one to three votes; thus, Iowa passed it in 1870, killed it in 1872;
passed it in 1874, failed to do so in 1876; passed it in 1878, and
failed in 1880; passed it again in 1882, and defeated it in 1884;
four times over and over, and this winter these heroic and indomitable women are trying it in Iowa again.
" If men were to make such a struggle for their rights, it would
be considered a fine thing, and there would be books and even
poetry written about it.
"In New York, since 1880, the women

have urged this great

416

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

measure before the Legislature each year. There it takes the
form of a bill to prohibit the disfranchisement of women. This
bill has several times come within five votes of passing the
Assembly.
"In many States, well sustained efforts for municipal suffrage
have been made, and, as if in rebuke to the conservatism, or worse,
of this great republic, this right of municipal suffrage is already
enjoyed in the province of Ontario, Canada, and throughout the
island of Great Britain by unmarried women to the same extent
as by men, there being the same property qualification required
of each.
" The movement for the amendment of the National Constitution began by petitioning Congress December, 1865, and since
1869 there have been consecutive applications to every Congress
praying for the submission to the States of a proposition similar to
the joint resolution herewith reported to the Senate.
" The petitions have come from all j^arts of the country ; more
especially from the Northern and Western States, although there
is an extensive and increasing desire for the suffrage existing
among the women in the Southern States, as we are informed by
those whose interest in the subject makes them familiar with the
real state of feeling in that part of our country. It is impossible
to know just what proportion of the people — men and women —
have expressed their desire by petition to the National Legislature during the last twenty years, but we are informed by Miss
Anthony that in the year 1871 Senator Sumner collected the
petitions from the files of the Senate and House of Representatives, and that there were then an immense number. A far
greater number have been presented since that time, and the same
lady is our authority for the estimate that in all more than two
hundred thousand petitions, by select and representative men and
women, have been poured upon Congress in behalf of this prayer
of woman to be free. Who is so interested in the framing of the
law as woman, whose only defense is the law ? There never was
a stronger exhibition of popular demand by American citizens to
be heard in the court of the people for the vindication of a fundamental right."
Since the submission of the report the attempt has been
made to secure action in several of the State Legislatures.
One which came very near being successful was made in the
State of Vermont. The suffrage was extended, if I am not
incorrectly informed, so far as the action of the House of

WOMAN

SUTFEAGE

IN

KANSAS.

417

Representatives of that State could give it, and an effort
being made to propose some restriction and condition upon
the suffrage, it was defeated, when, as I am told by the
friends of the movement, if it could have reached a
vote in the Vermont Legislature on the naked proposition
of suffrage to women as suffrage is extended to men, they
felt the very greatest confidence that they would have been
able to secure favorable action by the Legislature of that
State.
Miss Anthony informs me that in the State of Kansas,
where she spent several weeks last autumn (1886) in the
discussion of the subject before vast masses of people,
the largest halls, rinks, and places for the accommodation of popular assemblages in the State were crowded
to overfowing to listen to her address. In every instance, she took a vote of those vast audiences as to whether
they Avere in favor of woman suffrage or against it, and in
no single instance was there a solitary vote against the extension of the right, but affirmative and universal action
of these great assemblies demandino: that it be extended to
women.
Since that memoral)le campaign, Kansas has extended
municipal suffrage to her women. She did not create the
right — God created the right when he created the human
soul. But Kansas made its exercise legal, and gave, so far,
to woman liberty protected by law. Municipal suffrage is a
great power, and full enfranchisement must follow. Municipal suffrage has been once exercised. It has not destroyed
society nor disgraced the voter. It will not at once produce the millennium, but on every great question we shall
hereafter have Avoman's help in Kansas.
I have just received the speech of Hon. Albert Griffin,
Chairman of the National Anti-Saloon Committee, delivered
in Topeka, Kan., Aug. 9, 1887, in which, speaking of the
dangers to society by the transition of power from the
country to city populations, which arise, principally, from
the domination of the saloon among the latter, and of woman
suffrage as a means of counteracting this and other evils,
and of the operation of the municipal woman suffrage law of
that State, he says : —
27

418

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

" Leaving national matters, I desire now to say a few words
upon another subject. But, while doing so, I speak neither
officially nor as a partisan, but simply as a jjrivate citizen of
Kansas. Cities of the United States are growing with wonderful
rapidity, and those of Kansas are not exceptions to the rule.
Several States are already controlled by their cities, and the day
is not far distant when the most of them will be. There would
be nothing alarming about this, but for the further fact that cities
operate like magnets on the weak and vicious, which elements,
when concentrated in the masses, inevitably become the dupes
and tools of demagogues and corruptionists. How to neutralize
the political power of these dangerous masses in large cities is
one of the greatest problems of the day, and Kansas will do well
to solve it before she finds herself in the meshes of a net too
strong to be broken.
" Last winter, the Legislature of Kansas was wise enough and
courageous enough to pass a woman's municipal suffrage bill, and
the first election held under it proved that, in the very places
where the worst results had been predicted, the moral tone of
both parties was really improved, and a better class of officials
were chosen than would have been under the old system. It is
not surprising, therefore, that the success of the experiment — as
it was called by many — has led to a rapidly growing desire to
try it on a larger scale. Indeed, the woman's suffrage question is
certain soon to become a seriously disturbing factor, unless it is
taken out of partisan politics by referring it to the people for
their decision.
" The spring elections in this State, especially the one in Leavenworth, prove that in Kansas a large majority of the votes cast
by women will be on the side of good government, against human
vultures, and for the protection of the weak and innocent ; and I
believe that when they have the opportunity the voters of this
State will expunge from its constitution all reference to sex. I
am confident that the men of Kansas are now willing to give
their mothers, wives and daughters equal rights with themselves.
' Give,' did I say ? I take back that word and substitute ' restore '
to them the rights conferred by the Creator, and embezzled by
our male ancestors, and still wrongly and forcibly retained by us."
All will remember

the coarse falsehoods w^ith vrhich the

anti-woman-sufFrage press teemed immediately after the election itself, in regard to the conduct of women at the polls
in Kansas at an election, where, out of a total of ninety

woman's

vote

in

KANSAS.

419

thousand votes more than twenty-five thousand were cast
by the wives, mothers and sisters of that glorious State.
I have just received the following from one of the leading
journals of Topeka, and commend it to the attention of all
who deny the doctrines of this chapter.
"Topeka, Kan., October 16.
"Judge Adams, Secretary of the State Historical Society, has
just completed a compilation of the recent municipal vote, wliich
was the first one taken under the new law giving its women the
right to vote. The compilation shows that in 232 cities of the
State wliich voted, there was a total of 90,194 votes, of which
64.846 were male votes and 25,348 were female votes. Judge
Adams' report is accompanied hy tlie following statement:
"'I have been most thoroughly impressed with the conviction
that the people of Kansas, at last spring's election, completely
solved the M'oman suffrage question. It is no longer a question
whether women want to vote. They do want to vote. This is
proven l)y the fact that they have voted at the first opportunity
given tht-m. They voted with an intelligent, zealous, earnest
interest in the good of the cotnmunily in which they have their
]m,;ii('s. If the issue involved in the election of any town was
one affecting merely the local material interest of the community,
they voted with good judgment and for the common welfare. If
the question was as to better school management they voted for
the best. If it was for the street, sanitary or other reforms, they
voted prudently for what seemed to be the good of all. If it
was for a change of an administration notoriously involved in
sj)eculations with watei-works or other corporations, they voted
to deliver the city from such corrupt entanglement. If political
parties, controlled by saloon influence, put up candidates with the
odor of whisky on their garments, the women rebuked the party
managers and voted for candidates who would better promote the
moral welfare of the community. In every instance they voted
for home and fireside, for the freeing of the community from
those demoralizing influences and temptations from which every
good woman would deliver those of her own household. I have
been impressed with the reports I'eceived, showing the orderly and
quiet character of the elections. There was no dissent from the
testimony on this point.'
"He comments upon the unexpectedly large vote of women, and
upon the healthy influence of their presence in banishing riot and
disorder from the polling-place.
He remarks ui^on the courtesies

420

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

everywhere extended the lady voters, and gives statements as to
how the men of all parties vied in escorting the ladies to the polls
m carriages, how the ladies came to the polls accompanied by
their husbands, sometimes singly, sometimes in groups, and
quietly deposited their votes, and returned quietly to their homes,
and how sometimes they came by scores and fifties from points of
assemblage, and in some instances from churches, where they had
met and prayed together before coming."
And so the truth gets along after a while ; and when she
€omes she stays — and woman suffrage will stay. It will
abide with us as a part of free government forever.
Popular demonstrations of approval are developing in all
parts of the country, perhaps not to so marked an extent as
these which I have just stated ; but it is a feeling growing
in this country that woman should have this right ; that it
belongs to her as an individual and not as an atom in the
aggregate of her sex. As a human soul she has a right to
it, and is not to be deprived of it until such time as all shall
choose to exercise it. How can we deny the demand of
millions who believe in suffrage for women, and who can
not be forever silenced, for they give voice to the innate cry
of the human heart that justice be done not alone to man,
but to that half of this nation which now is free only by the
grace of the other? Let us indorse, if we do not initiate,
a movement which, in the development of our race, shall
guarantee liberty to all, without distinction of sex, even as
our glorious Constitution already grants the suffrage to every
citizen, without distinction of color or race.

CHAPTER
HISTORICAL

SKETCH

OF

THE

XX.
TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

The Temperance Movement an Effort of Humanitj- to Unchain Itself —
The Spirit of Liberty as Conceived by tlie Fathers of the Republic —
Four Valuable Volumes — Dr. Benjamin Hush's Pamphlet the Starting Point of the Present ]\Iovement — Hon. Samuel Dexter's Picture
of the Situation in 1814 — The Evil at Later Dates — Rev. Lyman
Beecher's Description of the "Creature Comforts" at a Connecticut
Ordination in 1810 — Churches and Religious Associations Awake —
American Society for the Promotion of Temperance Organized 1826
— Massachusetts Medical Society Discourages the Use of Liquors 1827
— Rush, Muzzey, Davis — Jonathan Kittredge's Pamphlet — The
Famous Massachusetts Fifteen-Gallon Law — The Washingtonians in
1840 — The Maine Law — Xeal Dow the Columbus of Prohibition —
For Thirty-Five Years Temperance has Moved on Abstinence and
Prohibition.

THE temperance movement is an effort of humanity to
unchain itself. It is a rebellion conducted l)y the people according to law, against the further domination of personal habits and social customs which have enslaved and
destroyed the world almost from the beginning. Emancipation of the individual from ignorance, passion and appetite
is the first and chief element of all liberty, and civil rights
are of no benefit to him whose higher nature is in subjection to the lower and grosser impulses, which -svere given to
serve and not to control.
When

the human race began its new departure in Independence Hall, on the fourth day of July, 1776, the great
men who led it comprehended that true liberty is a consequence of the inherent fitness of men for its possession ; that
freedom comes from within, and is of the mind. The}' conceived of liberty as a manifestation in and through man of
something higher and better than himself, and of which his
emancipated and more elevated state is the evolution. They
knew that all consciousness, all pleasure and all pain, appertain to the individual ; that the whole is but an aggregation
421

422

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

of atoms or parts ; and, though the sunshine may come
from without, yet all life and growth are within the solitary
recesses and by the processes of the individual soul. They
sought to achieve the emancipation of mankind by the
improvement and elevation of the units of the race. The
methods of tyranny, in all its forms, are just the contrary.
The one or the few repress, belittle and subject the many.
Their real agencies are ignorance, passion, appetite; and
these, if unrestrained, create the means of self-perpetuation
in the form of superstitions, customs and laws. As soon
as the exigencies of the Revolutionary War had passed away,
the intelligence of the superior few at once grasped the
thought that, if the whole people were to be made and
kept competent for the enjoyment and preservation of free
institutions, the great evils which resulted from the almost
universal slavery of intoxication must be radically restrained.
There had been Englishmen, like Lord Chesterfield, and
many Americans also, wdio had comprehended the traffic in
strong drink, and denounced it with a scathing severity
which has never been surpassed, even in our own time ; but
there had been no '^Temperance Movement," such as that
which, during the last century, has been rooting itself in the
intelligence and conscience of the common people, and growing broad and high, like a new and mighty tree, with healing- leaves and fragrant shade for all the nations of the earth.
Such a movement is only possible as a part of the general
progress of mankind, and must be the work of the masses of
men. The temperance movement of to-day is even more
logically the result of the working of free principles and
institutions than w^as the agitation which destroyed slavery ;
and it will be found to be an " irrepressible conflict," until
the people have liberated themselves from this most ancient,
debasing and destructive form of self-imposed oppression.
Wise kings and great religions have prohibited the use of
intoxicants in ages past, and have succeeded in partially
restraining the evil ;' but this temperance movement of modern times is a part of the American Revolution at home, and
an overflow of that Revolution abroad ; it is the sovereignty
of intelligence and enlightened self-interest, sanctioned by
the precepts of morality and religion, exerted by the com-

rush's famous essay, 1785.

423

mon people for their own more perfect liberation. Such a
movement is completely possible only in a free country ;
and, once set on foot in such a country, will never stay its
progress until the evil is exterminated, or the nobler impulses of the people have disappeared, and they have
returned to that last state of debasement and thraldom
which is worse than the first.
It w^ill be impossible to present more than the briefest
outline of the history of the present temperance movement,
which is, I firmly believe, to wax stronger and stronger unto
the perfect day. For its full exposition, the reader is
referred to such w-orks as " The Liquor Problem of all
Ages," by Dr. Dorchester; ''Alcohol in History," bj^ Rev.
Dr. Richard Eddy, the " Centennial Temperance Volume,"
with the history it contains written by Dr. Dunn, and " One
Hundred Years of Temperance."
These four volumes are of great value, and I would give
up my whole book to the commendation of them if their
universal perusal could thus be secured.
The real commencement of the temperance movement now
in progress, is generally identified with the publication, by
Dr. Benjamin Rush, of his pamphlet, entitled "The Effects
of Ardent Spirits on the Human Mind and Body" — in the
year 1785. It was a part of the eternal fitness of things
that this distinguished service to mankind should be rendered by the man who was chairman of the committee on
Independence in the Continental Congress of 1776.
This essay was a new indictment of the Avorst form of
oppression to mankind, and produced in its own field an
influence almost like " Common Sense " upon the Revolution. During the next forty years it was the leading
temperance document, and, although confined in its denunciations to distilled spirits, is not surpassed in earnestness and power by anything which has been written
since. It must be remembered that the demonstration of
the poisonous nature of all alcoholic drinks, which modern
science has given to us, was not available to Dr. Rush, and
that the specially destructive effects of ardent or distilled
spirits, in his time, almost compelled him to attack them
alone, without too violentl}^ assailing the drinking customs

424

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

of the people. Nor is it strange that, in the almost impenetrable thick darkness of that period, the vision of the wisest
should have been obscured.
If Dr. Rush were living now, no one can doubt that he
would hold to the same advanced opinions which we have
already seen expounded by Dr. Davis of Chicago, his worthy
successor, not alone in the temperance reform, but in the
leadership of the medical profession.
It is very difficult to comprehend the surprise with which
society must have listened to the strange voice of this one
prophet crying in the wilderness ; but his voice was heard,
although not seeming immediately to accomplish much. It
was like the song of the angels in the air. It was a great
annunciation, and we can hear it yet. Benjamin Franklin,
Gen. Putnam, Dr. Belknap, and others, supported Dr.
Rush in his work, but, after all, what were they among so
many ! The truth, however, had been spoken, or at least
that half of it which condemned ardent spirits had been
spoken, and it could not return void to Him who sent it.
The rest must follow. The revolution was begun and could
not go backward, although, until about the year 1825, the
drinking curse continued to be most grievous upon the
American people.
In 1792 there were 2579 distilleries in the United States.
In 1810 there were 14,191. The population had not doubled
durinof the time in which the number of distilleries had increased nearly sixfold.
The consumption per capita in 1792 was 2i gallons, and
in 1810 it was 4:^ gallons — in both cases including children
and slaves, who generally could have consumed but little.
Hon. Samuel Dexter was president of the Massachusetts
Society for the Suppression of Intemperance, in 1814. He
had been Secretary of War and of the Treasury. He says
in a circular issued by him as president of the society in
1814:
"The solemn fact is, more than four times as much spirit
is consumed on the farm now as was used upon the same
farm, by the same conductors of it, twenty years ago. The
pocket-flask has grown into a case-bottle, and the keg into a
barrel.
This fact is not affirmed upon light evidence.
The

_l

Rttgene //.

Clapp,

Head of tlic Sons of Tciiipcrancc of the United States.

DARK

DAYS

OF

INTEMPERANCE.

425

consequence is found to be that the bloated countenance and
the tottering frame are become a frequent spectacle among
the yeomen of the country, once regarded, even to a proverb,
as the healthiest, the hardiest and the happiest class of the
community."
In 1823, the consumption of ardent (distilled) spirits had
increased to 7i gallons per capita yearly, and the whole
nation seemed to be dying with alcoholic poisoning.
The Boston Recorder says, in 1823 : "It is an evil of wide
extent and it still spreads. No check is given or scarcely
attempted. Philanthropists, statesmen and Christians witness and deplore it. As a destroying angel, it lifts its
pallid front and ghastly look in our cities, towns and scattered settlements. It reels and wears rags in every street,
and mouths the heavens with drunken blasphemies under
every hedge. Nor does it lay its polluted hand on the ral)ble
merely ; it may be seen in milder and more fashionable forms,
pacing splendid carpets, Avaving a lily hand over well furnished side-boards, and here and there flushing the cheek
and deadening the eyes of female delicacy. Fifty millions
lost is but a trifle compared with the moral influence of intemperance. This immense sum has poured down the
throats of ten millions of people, seventy-five millions of
gallons of liquid fire mingling and flowing with their lifeblood."
Rev. Lyman Beecher says of an ordination in Plymouth,
Ct., soon after his settlement in Litchfield, which was in 1810 :
"At this ordination the preparation for our creature-comforts,
besides food, was a broad side-board covered
with decanters and bottles and sugar and pitchers of water.
There we found all the kinds of liquors then in vogue. The
drinking was apparently universal. This preparation was
made by the society as a matter of course. When the consociation arrived they always took something to drink round,
also before public services and always on their return. As
they could not all drink at once, they were obliged to stand
and wait as people do when they go to mill
When
they had all done drinking and taken pipes and tobacco, in
less than fifteen minutes there was such a smoke you could
not see. The noise I can not describe : it was the maximum

426

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

of hilarity. They told their stories cand were at the height
talk another " similar ordination. Think of such a
jocose
of He
describes
body of men dealing damnation round the land in a double
sense. One must admire their plucky disregard of selfinterest, when they could deliberately adhere to the stern
theology of their day, notwithstanding their own dubious
prospects hereafter under its vigorous doctrines.
Dr. Beecher proceeds :
" These two meetings were near together, and in both my
alarm and shame and indignation were intense. ^Twas that
that woke me up for the war. And, silently, I took an oath
before God that I would never attend another ordination of
that kind. I was full. My heart kindles at the thought
of it now." So it is. Flowers as well as nettles spring
from the dung-hill, and the scandalous conduct of these
clergymen, who in our time would have been taken for a
party of loafers in a saloon, stirred up a revolt in their own
hearts, and we have plucked the flower of safety from the
nettle of danger. To-day the clergy are the bulwark of the
temperance reform.
Churches and religious associations awoke. Drunken men
were in no condition to tinker creeds and lay on holy hands.
The whole business was rank blasphemy. The conscience
and intellect of the whole nation were excited, and concentrated upon the situation. There was need of a change, and
the change came.
On the thirteenth day of February, 1826, "The American
Society for the Promotion of Temperance " was organized.
It was founded upon the doctrine of total abstinence,
although it did not rigidly enforce it. Its formation grew
out of the admitted failure of the doctrine of the moderate
use and the substitution of the fermented for distilled drinks,
which had been the theory of Dr. Kush, and, generally, the
highest point to which the tide of reformation had risen in
the minds of those who followed him. But Dr. Edwards
said of the new society, " We w^ant for members holy men,
who do not use intoxicating liquors unless prescribed by a
physician as a medicine." They advocated the doctrine of
total abstinence, but, says Dr. Dorchester, " considerations

THE

LIGHT

INCREASING.

427

of providence held them back from pledging the people."
Upon this basis the controversy continued for j^ears. The
movement was a mental process still, an effort to educate,
enlighten and comdnce, so that the individual will, guided by
reason, might be led to assert supremacy over conduct, and
thus achieve personal independence of the tyrant, without
assistance from the law.
In the same

year the National Philanthropist was

started in Boston. Its motto was, " Temperate drinking is
the down-hill road to intemperance." Thus the newspaper
entered the ranks of the reformers. Educational agencies
were aroused, and temperance societies formed among the
students and the young everywhere.
In 1827, the Massachusetts Medical Society resolved " to
discourage the use of ardent spirits, and to discontinue the
employment of spirituous preparations Avhenever they could
find substitutes." Thev also declared against the too careless
and excessive use of wine even, and thus entered in a certain
feeble, half-conscious way upon the war against fermented
drinks.
In 1827, Prof. Reuben D. Muzzey of Dartmouth Medical
College delivered his famous address before the New Hampshire Medical Society, of which he was president. No
man is surer of immortality than Dr. ]\Iuzzey. Hear
him! For sixty years that voice has 1)een ringing throughout the world ! — " Let all virtuous men unite to expel the
common enem3\ He ought not to be allowed a place
in Christian society. He is a foreigner, a Mohammedan ; he was born in the land of robbers, and he has
established the genuineness of his origin by the millions he
has deprived of property, of morals and of life. He has
come to us in the robe of friendship, has assured us of his
best regards, has proffered his aid and solace in sickness,
pain and poverty. Such a friend, who could reject? He
has been received into general favor, and admitted to Christian confidence and companionship ; and what reward has he
taken for his kind offices ? He has stolen away character,
health, property, the rich blessings and endowments of
society and domestic intercourse, the moral sense, life and
the hope of heaven.

428

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

" Gird up, then, to the combat. Always meet him as an
enemy ; never again admit him to your bosoms; give him no
quarter; expel Mtii from your houses; drive him from the
land. Always treat him as a murderer ; he has slain your
brothers, he lurks for the life-blood of your children; he
whets his sabre for you."'
And now abide these three — Kush, Muzzey and Davis.
The medical profession can remove intemperance, and is
responsible if it be not done.
I may be pardoned for quoting again from one of the
giants of those days, and for the pride with which I reproduce the following extracts from the work of an honored
citizen of my native and beloved State.
The Hon. Jonathan Kittredge of Canaan, New Hampshire, was one of the ablest lawyers and jurists of his generation. On the eighth day of January, 1827, he delivered an
"Address on the Eifects of Ardent Spirits," before a public
meeting, in the town of Lyme, New Hampshire, which was
published by the American Tract Society, No. 221 of its
series, and circulated by scores if not hundreds of thousands
among the people for many years. Temperance literature
has produced no more powerful document than " Kittredge's
Address," and, while I read it, the image of the mighty old
man arises before me, as I saw his form and listened to his
impressive eloquence at the bar, in the days of my youth.
Eminent lawyer and able judge that he was, it is this little
tract, b}"- which he conferred immeasurable blessings upon his
race, which will preserve his name in loving memory to the
end of time. I quote briefly from the address to show something of the ardor and power with which it is written, but,
more particularly, to indicate how the temperance movement had at last evolved the great doctrine and duty of total
abstinence. First, he pictures the effect of the moderate
use of intoxicating drink.
He says :
" We can all call to mind the case of some individual whom we
have known for years, perhaps from his infancy, who is now a
poor miserable drunkard. In early life his hopes and prospects
were as fair as ours. His family was respectable, and he received
all those advantages which are necessary, and which were calcu-

kittredge's

address, 1827.

429

lated to make him a useful and resjiectable member of society.
Perhaps he was oui- school-fellow, aind our boyhood may have
been passed in his company. We witnessed the first budding of
his mental powers, and know that he possessed an active, enterprising mind. He grew up into life with every prospect of usefulness. He entered into business, and for a while did well. His
parents looked to him for support in old age, and he was capable
of affording it. He accumulated property, and in a few years,
with ordinary prudence and industry, would have been independent. He married and became the head of a family, and the
father of children, and all was prosperous and happy around him.
Had he continued as he began, he would now have been a comfort to his friends, and an honor to the community. But the scene
quickly changed. He grew fond of ardent spirits. He Avas seen
at the store and the tavern. By degrees he became intemperate.
He neglected his business, and his affairs went to gradual decay.
He is now a drunkard ; his property is wasted ; liis parents have
died of broken hearts; his wife is pale and emaciated, his children
ragged, squalid and ignorant. He is tlie tenant of some little
cabin that poverty has erected to house him from the storm and
tempest. Pie is useless and worse than useless; he is a pest to all
around him. All the feelings of his nature are blunted ; he has
lost all shame ; he procures his accustomed supply of the poison
that consumes him ; he staggers through mud and through filth
to his hut; he meets a weeping wife and starving children; he
abuses them, he tumbles into his straw, he rolls and foams like a
mad brute, till he is able to go again. He calls for more rum, he
repeats the scene from time to time, from day to day, till soon his
nature faints, and he becoynes sober in death.
"Let us reflect that this guilty, wretched creature had an
immortal mind — he was like us, of the same flesh and blood —
he was our brother, destined to the same eternity, created by and
accountable to the same God, and will at last stand at the same
judgment-bar; and who, amid such reflections, will not weep at
his fate, whose eye can remain dry, and Avhose heart unmoved?
"This is no picture of the imagination. It is a common and
sober reality. It is what we see almost every day of our lives;
and we live amid such scenes and events, with the addition or
subtraction^ of a few circumstances ; it is the case of every one
of the common drunkards around us. They have not completed
the drama — they are alive — but they are going to death with
rapid strides, as their predecessors have already gone. Another
company of immortal minds is coming on to fill their places, as
they have filled others'.

The number is kept good and increasing."

430

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

This was spoken more than sixty years ago. Even then
it was the " old, old, story " of moderate indulgence, gradual
degradation, and final despair. To-day it is the same story,
a little older, true as ever, and far wider in its application.
After a powerful discussion of the general subject of intemperance, Mr. Kittredge voices the concurring sentiment of
the time as follows :

" But it is this moderate use of ardent spirits that produces all
the excess. It is this which paves the way to downright and
brutal intoxication. Abolish the ordinary and temperate use of
ardent spirits, and there would not be a drunkard in the
country.
"But we are apt to think that the wretches whom we see and
have described were always so ; that they were out of miserable
and degraded families ; and they are walking in the road in which
they were born. But this is not so. Among the number may be
found a large proportion who were as lovely in their infancy, as
promising in their youth, and as useful in early life, as your own
children, and have become drunkards — I repeat it, and let it
never be forgotten — have become drunkards by the temperate,
moderate and habitual use of ardent spirits, just as you use them
now. Were it not for this use of ardent spirits, we should not
now hear of drunken senators and drunken magistrates, of
drunken lawyers and drunken doctors ; churches would not now
be mourning over drunken ministers and drunken members ; parents would not now be weeping over drunken children, wives
over drunken husbands, husbands over drunken wives, and angels
over a drunken world.
"He who advises men not to drink to excess may lop off the
branches; he who advises them to drink only on certain occasions may fell the trunk ; but he who tells them not to drink at
all strikes and digs deep for the roots of the hideous vice of intemperance ;and this is the only course to pursue.
"
Let those who can not be reclaimed go to ruin, and
the quicker the better if you regard only the public good ; but
save the rest of our population ; save yourselves ; save your children ! Raise not up an army of drunkards to supply their places !
Purify your houses! They contain the plague of death — the
poison that in a few years will render some of your little ones
what the miserable wretches that you see staggering the streets
are now. And who, I ask, would not do it ? What father, who
knew that one of his sons that he loves was in a ' few years to be

ENLIGHTENMENT

AND

REFORM.

431

what hundreds you can name are now, would hesitate, that he
raiglit save him, to banish intoxicating drinks from his premises
forever ?
" But if all will do it he is saved ; and he who contributes but
a mite to this work of God deserves the everlasting gratitude of
the republic. If the names of a Brainerd, of a Schwartz, of a
Buchanan, have been rendered immortal by their efforts to convert the heathen to Christianity, the names of those men who
shall succeed in converting Christians to temperance and sobriety
should be written in letters of ever-during gold, and appended by
angels in the temple of the living God. The sum of their benevolence would be exceeded only by His who came down from
heaven for man's redemption. Then, banish it; this is tlie only
way to save your children.
" As long as you keep ardent spirits in your houses, as long as
you drink it yourselves, as long as it is polite and genteel to sip
the intoxicating bowl, so long society will remain just what
it is now, and so long drunkards will spring from your loins, and
so long drunkards will wear your names to future generations.
And there is no way given under lieaven Avhereby man can be
saved from the vice of int(;mi)erance, but that of total abstinence.''''
Truer now than then, for the drinks of to-day are deadlier
than ever before.
Churches and denominational associations, medical bodies,
military organizations, public meetings, almost every form
of effort united to endorse these and similar expressions of
sentiment in all parts of the country ; and a mighty movement, based on "moral suasion," filled the land for the
removal of the evils of intoxication from society, Avhich has
never wholly ceased, although it was seriously interrupted by
the civil war, and is now not only more active than ever at
home,

but is agitating and educating the popular mind

throughout the civilized world. This work — the enlightenment of the mind, and the awakening of the moral sense
which results from it, so that both the utility and the duty of
personal abstinence from whate\er poisons the soul as well
as the body — is now clearly seen and felt to be the only
substantial foundation of permanent temperance reform.
The public sentiment which resulted from this discussion
naturally sought to ap[)ly the doctrine of total abstinence to
society through the forms of law.
If the use of alcohol as

432

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

a beverage is an injury and a sin by the individual, how can
it be right for society to permit an indulgence which concentrates upon the whole, with the accumulating intensity of
o;eometrical ratio, all the evils which des^rade and ruin the
direct consumer !
Thus was evolved the idea of legal suasion, which may
be said to have the same relation to society, using the term
in the sense of the State, which moral conviction or suasion
has to the individual. Each has in view the establishment of
a law, by the one for the control of personal conduct, and
by the other the control of the whole by the combined
power of all its parts. And as in its origin and early stages
the movement sought to reform by substituting the restricted
personal use, and only after experience had demonstrated
the futility and folly of the eJEfort asserted the broad, radiical and potent doctrine of total abstinence as a civil, moral
and religious duty, so also, by reason of what would seem to
be inevitable from the structure of human nature, the first
effort in the movement for public law sought only to secure
moderate restriction by society — to impose conditions and
hindrances, but not to forbid. The serpent was licensed to
bite, but the people required it to be done with propriety,
and demanded a fair division of the profits of the traffic in
their own bodies and souls. But the poison continued to
kill, whether administered by licensed regulars or by irresponsible quacks; and finally, almost in the last throes of
social dissolution, the holy doctrine of the total prohibition
by public law of the use of intoxicating liquors as a beverage
was born into the legislation of the world.
The people began to move for the repeal of license laws,
and for legislation having for its object the outlawry of the
liquor traffic, and which could only result in its ultimate
classification among crimes.
True, they did not grasp the idea of destroying the
evil in the germ or point of manufacture, and only sought
to mop up the ocean, all along its infinite shores of woe,
by preventing and punishing the retail sale; but the
principle of prohibition was involved, and the unfailing
logic of the public mind will be sure to utilize it, by the
adoption and consecration of every form of its application

LEGAL

SUASION.

433

in future legislation, until the rescue of mankind is accomplished.
In 1838, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts adopted the
famous fifteen-gallon law, which greatly injured the retail
traffic. It was, in fact, almost death to the saloon, in
those days, when laws were made to be executed, and not
to be evaded or to serve as a legal cloak for crime.
This law prohibited the retailing of any spirituous liquors,
except for medicine and for use in the arts, l)y apothecaries
and physicians specially licensed — in quantities of less than
fifteen gallons, and that delivered and carried away all at
one time.
In many other States like laws were enacted, many of
them soon to be repealed ; but the agitation or movement
had been placed upon the right track, and the engineer knew
whither to run his train. Scores of years might and will
elapse before it arrives at the millennial terminus : ])ut it is
only a question of time, the avoiding of accidents and the
removal of obstructions. The contest in legislation had
previously been between license, or regulation, and entire
freedom from all restraint. Henceforth it was to be practically conceded that the liquor trade is amenable to law, and
that, unlike useful occupations, the public good requires its
regulation or restraint.
Ever since that time the real controversy has been
between license as a form of alleged restraint, accompanied
with a certain cash interest or partnership by the people in
the admitted curse, on the one hand, and war to the death
against it, on the other. In such a conflict there can be no
compromise, because principles are incapable of selling out,
and human souls in masses are honest and almost sure to be
right so far as they comprehend the issues involved. Having
once seen clearly the nature and effect of the use of poisonous beverages upon society, and that prohibition is the
very essence of its prevention, as much as prohibition is of
the essence of the ten commandments or of legislation
against any other crime, the people will cling to the great
remedy and insist upon its use, notwithstanding the nostrums of honest or of knavish quackery, to say nothing
of the alternate coma and contortion of the patient.
28

434

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

An effort was made to wield the power of the national
government to the complete destruction of all State legislation against the trade ; but the Supreme Court of the United
States decided, in the words of Chief Justice Taney : —
" Every State may regulate its own internal traffic according to its own judgment and upon its own views of the
interest and well-being of its citizens. ... If any State
deems the retail and internal traffic in ardent spirits injurious to its citizens, and calculated to produce idleness, vice
or debauchery, I see nothing in the Constitution of the
United States to prevent it from regulating and restraining
the traffic, or from prohibiting it altogether, if it thinks
proper."
This was the result of the famous liquor cases carried up
from the States of Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Rhode
Island, decided in the year 1847, and to be found in 5
Howard, " Reports of the Supreme Court of the United
States." Thus much was settled for the States ; but the
great questions of importation, exportation and transportation, and other questions which grow out of the powers of
the general government to regulate commerce, as well as
inherent difficulties which result from the fact that the evil is
national and requires national action for its removal, still
remain, and will remain until some better day, when prohibition shall be written into the constitutions and laws of both
the Nation and the States.
^
But it was found by experience, the Great Reformer,
that prohibition and punishment of the retail sale, merely,
were not an efficient remedy, for the reason that the ease
and frequenc^y with which the offence was committed, combined with the large profits of the transaction and the
generally slight penalties, almost always, in practice, a
small fine, enabled the seller to continue in the profitable
violation of the law. There were thus found to be inherent
and radical defects, which must be remedied, if the reform
was to receive great and permanent support, by even prohibitory legislation.
It could hardly be said that either license or the moderate
application of prohibition failed for the want of an adequate
public sentiment, certainly not from lack of the greatest effort

THE

WASHINGTONIAN

MOVEMENT.

435

to create that sentiment, for the support of the law. In
1835, " more than eight thousand temperance societies had
been formed ; more than four thousand distilleries had been
stopped ; more than two hundred thousand persons had
ceased to use any kind of intoxicating liquor ; about two
millions had ceased to use distilled liquors, one million
five hundred thousand of whom were enrolled members of
the temperance societies."
(" Liquor Problem," p. 474.)
When the tide of reformation hesitated, a new form of
agitation, electrical and almost volcanic in its character,
was developed, in what is known as the Washingtonian
movement.
On the evening of the second day of April, 1840, six
inebriates, said to have been a clul) organized for " social
tippling," met in Chase's Tavern, in the city of Baltimore.
A distinguished lecturer on temperance was to speak in the
city that night, and the club sent a committee to hear the
lecture and report to the club. The report of the committee
was favorable, — the landlord denounced temperance lectures, adiscussion ensued, and a member of the club said,
'' We expect rum-sellers to cry down temperance lecturers ;
it is for your interest to do so."
They reorganized the tippling club into " The Washington
Society," and took the pledge of total abstinence. They
kept the pledge, became apostles of its principles, and the
movement spread all over the land. In a few years six
hundred thousand drunkards had been reformed, of Avhom,
however, all but one hundred and fifty thousand returned
to their cups. The moral of this movement is that we must
save the boj^ if we would be sure of the man. On the
whole, it may be doubted whether the Washingtonian
excitement was a blessing or a curse ; because, unfortunately, many of its most zealous and active promoters discourasred all resort to the enactment and enforcement of
laws against the traffic. The result was that when the
nervous exaltation of communities had passed aAvay, and the
extra momentum of moral forces was exhausted, public
sentiment not being crystallized into the enduring forms of
law, the enemy came in again like a flood, and prevailed
mightily once more.
To be sure, one hundred and fifty

436

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

thousand reformed men had adhered to their pledges and
were saved ; but Avhat are one hundred and fifty thousand
among so many ? And who knows that the demoralization
of public sentiment which the Washingtonians created in
their opposition to legal restraint was not the principal
reason why the cup of temptation and destruction was again
put to the lips of the four hundred and fifty thousand who
fell and perished in that last state which is worse than the
first? Besides, we have ever since been combating the
absurd theory, which is the favorite fortress of the liquordealers, that the evil is increased because it is prohibited by
law. This feature of the Washingtonian movement must
have been a trace of maudlin insanity which pledges could
not eradicate, and the consequent loss to the coming generation of the best results of this mighty rushing wind from
heaven is full of pithy suggestion to those who are engaged
in the temperance movement of to-day. Let society enact
laws when overshadowed by the highest and holiest inspiration, and according to the loftiest ideals. Laws should
always be better than the people until the people have
attained unto them. A good law should never be repealed
because it is violated. It should remain on the statute-book,
like the Golden Rule in the Christian faith — as an ideal for
conduct, if nothing more, and as a rallying-point for the
faithful and law-abiding minority, until at last the whole
community climbs to the higher standard, and enforces its
beneficent provisions for the general good.
But, even with moral agitation and restrictive law combined, the evil, although spasmodically curtailed, still tenaciously remained.
Yet the resolute determination of the people to conquer
their own freedom from their oppressor did not yield, so that
a new and most important improvement in prohibitory laws
was developed.
It was the Maine law.
Neal Dow is the Columbus of prohibition.
The Vikings may have discovered the coast, but they did
not hold it. Columbus revealed the New World and it
became the home of nations.
The Maine laws declared the liquor trade to be a nuisance

Gen. Neal Dow,
" Father of the Maine Law. "

THE

MAINE

LAW.

437

and a crime, and destroyed the contraband and forfeited
stock of liquor, with all its utensils and agencies, like a kit
of burglars' tools. In addition to this, it increased personal
penalties and made imprisonment easy whenever a community
is in earnest.
The Maine law, in efficient form, was signed by the Governor June 2, 1851. Before its enactment, prohibition had
been a barren fig-tree, excejDt in remarkably fine seasons.
Since that time, whenever the lord of the vineyard has cared
for it, the tree has borne good fruit. It does not yield well
in the wild state ; but it is not a thistle, and, when properly cultivated, it produces, not thorns, but figs.
The temperance movement had now developed the two
great agencies of its own promotion, and henceforth there
could be no doubt that the efibrts of its supporters would be
directed to secure total abstinence hij the individual and absolute prohibition by the State.
For the last thirty-five years, more than the average lifetime of a generation, the application of these two principles
— abstinence and prohibition — has been the intelligent
object of the temperance movement, and such will necessarily
continue to be the plan of battle to the end.
But the public mind grasps the situation slowly ; and
every step in advance is taken only after experience has
demonstrated its necessity. Prohibition was long applied
merely to the retail sale. It seems incomprehensible that
intelligent law-makers should not have directed their efforts
first against the manufacture ; but it is only within the last
few years that this has been done ; and even now the force
of the temperance movement is largely wasted by misdirection. More slowly still has the pul^lic mind been able to
comprehend the necessity of action by the nation, in order
that the entire sovereignty of the people may be exerted for
the overthrow of an evil which is as incapable of control by
the States as the waters of the ocean are of separation by
geographical lines. But, notwithstanding all these and other
difficulties, which have been and are and will be encountered, the liquor traffic is doomed to destruction ; because
the public good demands it, and the intelligent conscience of
the people will never rest until the strong arm of the law

438

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

has thrust the sword of prohibition through and through the
monster's heart.
Thus, through many vicissitudes and fluctuations, the temperance movement has grown stronger and more sublime
during the last third of a century, until now it displays international proportions and embraces the world in its sweep.
Always and everywhere its only real victories have been
won under the banner of total abstinence and prohibition.
In every controversy, whether in nation, or state, or county,
or other municipality, the test comes between these two great
principles on the one hand, and the moderate or free use
— high or low license or free indulgence, for it is all one thing
ultimately — on the other.
Guided by the unerring instinct of self-preservation, the
traffic invariably arrays itself with this latter group. No
stronger demonstration than this fact could exist, that only
the former are its enemies, while license and moderation are
its friends.
The intellio;ence which comes of incessant ao-itation has
now forced the issue to the front, where it stands as the great
moral, sentimental and even industrial problem of the times.
Evasion or escape from it is no longer possible. It confronts
all political parties, and where they neglect or refuse to consider, itcreates new ones and old things pass away. Religion
finds in the liquor traffic the personification of all sin, and in
destroying it achieves the salvation of the race. The hopes
and aifections of domestic life have discovered in it their
great enemy ; and are concentrating against the destroyer of
manhood, womanhood, childhood, home. And now, behold !for all the aroused faculties of the masses of men are
in action to achieve independence of the tyrant of the ages ;
and all the attributes and powers of Almighty God are
pledged for their success.
The Supreme Court of the United States has just decided, in the Kansas
cases, that the State has full power to prohibit the manufactui'e and sale of
intoxicating liquors within its limits, without compensation for loss thereby
occasioned to those previously engaged in the traffic. This settles, finally
and favorably, a vexed and important question, which has hitherto greatly
perplexed and, in some localities,^ retarded the temperance reform.

CHAPTER
FORCES

AGAESrST

ALCOHOL —

XXI.
RELIGIOUS

ORGAXIZATIOXS.

The Two Great Priiicij)les, Total Abstinence and Prohibition — Religious Organizations — "One Hundred Years of Tempei-ance " — The
Roll-Call of the Churches — Presbyterian Church — John "Wesley
and the jMethodist Champions — The BajDtist Position ; Goy. George
N. Briggs and Congi-essional TemiDerance Society ; Wayland, Knapp,
Garrison: Mssissip^Di Convention of 1884: Dr. Giftbrd's Summaiy —
Eeformed Dutch Church — Cumberland Presbyterian Church —
Lutheran Church — Society of Friends — United Brethren — Disciples of Christ — Universalist Church : Thompson, Chapin and ]\Iinev
— Methodist Protestant Church — Congregational Churches; Humphrey, Evarts, Beecher, Justin Edwards, Cheever, Gough, "Wilson
and others — Episcopal Church — German Reformed Church — The
Moravians — Reformed Episcopal — The Unitanans ; Lowell, Channing. Ware, May, Pierrepont, Gannett, Hale, Faxon — Free Baptist
Church — Christian Church — Church of God — United Presbj-terian
Church — African Methodists — Evangelical Association— Methodist
Episcopal Church South — The Unanimity of the Churches on tliis
Great j\Ioral Issue.

IFIXD it impossilile Tvithin the limits of a much larger
work than this to enter upon a statement of the multifarious details of the temperance movement in recent years.
Nor is it necessaiy, for the most that is important is either
fresh in general recollection or is accessible in the various
records of contemporaneous events. I have endeavored
rather to "VN'rite of facts and principles which are the elements
of the great debate, and on which the final decision of the controversy must depend, and to avoid the endless and profitless discussion of the details of temporary measures and of
local action. It is sufficient for this purpose to say that it
seems to me that all which is desirable or permanent in the
temperance movement lies in the application and enforcement of these two great leading principles : Total abstinence
from the use of all intoxicating beverages by the individual,
and absolute prohibition thereof by public law.
Whatever
439

440

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

of statutory or of constitutional legislation by the nation and by
the States, or by the people in limited localities, under the
peculiar method known as local-option laws, promotes or
tends to promote the ascendency of these principles is in the
direction of permanent and desirable temperance reform.
All else, in my belief, is worthless — a fraud, a delusion and
a snare — save only as failure lights up the lamp of experience
to guide honest souls into safer paths hereafter. And really,
has not history already recorded enough for the instruction
of all whose sincere desire is to destroy, rather than to protect, this trade in human bodies and souls ? But capital and
appetite are a strong combination, and they have infinite ingenuity to devise and equal power to execute means " not to
do it." If God was not a majority, it would be a hopeless
prospect for the temperance reform. In this and in following chapters, I shall endeaver to give some account of the=
organizations, forces and instrumentalities which are arrayed
on the side of man in his great conflict with alcohol.
or

RELIGIOUS

ORGANIZATIONS.

The primary relation of man is to his Creator, the Great
First Cause, " whom we call God and know no more." The
feeling which exists in consequence of this relation manifests itself in love, adoration and worship. It is universal,
ineradicable and intense. It is religion ; and, whatever may
be the forms and ceremonies of its manifestation, and however it may be perverted and distorted in its development,
this element or attribute of human nature is in him the
source of aspiration and progress. It is the elastic connection which continually lifts the race as a whole, and exerts the
most powerful and permanent impulse in all reform. The
religious organizations of Christendom demonstrate this^
truth. This elastic union between man and his God is often
strained, and sometimes appears to be broken ; but, generally, itholds, and, let us hope, may never fail in the end to
draw every wandering planet again to the bosom of its eternal
source. As might be expected, - — in fact, must from the laws
of nature be the case — those organizations in society through
which conscience, morality and worship are most actively
manifested, the churches — religious bodies — have from the-

THE

PRESBYTERIAN

CHURCH.

441

first been, and still continue to be, the great visible force
"which has sustained the temperance movement against the
opposition it has encountered. I do not mean that they are
composed of anything but " men of like passions as ourselves." They have, indeed, required to be enlightened and
converted; but I do mean that they, as organizations, represent the highest and best in the community — not all of it,
but the majority of it ; and that every good cause has very
largely, I think chiefly, to rely upon them for that ever present power which grinds the grist of human welfare. Large
volumes could be, have been, written, giving the history of
temperance efibrt in each of the great Christian denominations, and I can only refer the reader to them for all but a
few very general statements. But I wish to show the spirit
and attitude which the great denominations of the Christian
church, representing, as they do, the highest and strongest
forces at work in our civilization, have occupied hitherto, and
their present position in line of battle. " One Hundred
Years of Temperance," pul)lished by the National Temperance Society, contains this information in full. I am greatly
indebted to it for facts relating to the Protestant churches.
THE

PRESBYTERIAN

CHURCH.

The Presbyterian Church has noted and strongly opposed
the sin of intemperance from its organization. The Rev.
Francis Makemie was the first Presbyterian minister in
America. He was the father of American Presbyterianism,
and preached against intemperance as early as 1705 — and
similar utterances were common by the clergy of this denomination ever afterward.
The ancestors of Dr. Benjamin Rush, whose relation to the
reform is well understood, were mostly Quakers and Baptists, but his mother was a Presbyterian, and he is himself
described by the historian as a " noble and gifted son of the
Presbyterian Church."
The constitution of the church was adopted May 28, 1788,
and at the first meeting of the assembly, which was the next
year, " she expressed her determination to contribute her
part to render men sober
subjects of a lawful gov-

442

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

€rnment." In the year 1811, Dr. Rush succeeded in arousing the assembly to vigorous action, which accomplished
great good, and, among other things, occasioned the organization of the Massachusetts Society for the Suppression of
Intemperance.
Rev. William Y. Brown, D.D. , tells us " that it may be said,
without any disparagement to others, that by this deliverance
of 1811, and by the subsequent activity of the committee
on correspondence,
the Presbyterian Church became
the acknowledged leader of God's hosts in the temperance
reform in this country — a position which she has nobly and
honorably maintained for nearly three-quarters of a century."
Even so early this church began to foreshadow the doctrine
of total abstinence, and its application at least to ardent
spirits, to enforce temperance by church discipline, to prohibit a preacher from retailing " spirituous or malt liquors
without forfeiting his ministerial character among us." It
has ever been the " supreme desire of the Presbyterian
Church to ' secure ' the utter extermination of the traffic in
intoxicating liquors as a beverage."
Between 1827 and 1830, this church took a strong stand
for total abstinence, and, maintaining itself ever in the
advance, declared for prohibitory laws in 1854, and expressed
the hope that the time was not far distant " when such a law
should be universally adopted and enforced." From this
position the Presbyterian Church has never wavered since.
Indeed, both stability of purpose and the spirit of progression seem to distinguish this great organization.
In 1883, the assembly adopted " Dr. John Herrick Johnson's Amendment " unanimously, in the following words :
'' In view of the evils wrought by this scourge of the race,
this assembly would hail with acclamations of joy and thanksgiving the utter extermination of the traffic in intoxicating
liquors as a beverage, by the power of Christian conscience,
public opinion, and the strong arm of the civil law " ; and in
1885 the assembly again declared : " The entire extinction
of the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors as a beverage isthe goal to which the assembly looks forward, and
for the accomplishment of which it expects the earnest,
united, determined and persistent labors of all its ministers

THE

METHODIST

EPISCOPAL

CHURCH.

443

and people, in connection with the reh'gious and sober citizens of our common comitiy."
The Presbyterian Church stops there because there is no
further to go. There is no more advanced ground, and it is
with just pride that one of her distinguished sons (Dr.
Brown) exclaims : " So hath this noble church wrought in
the past century in this great cause, and I have the utmost
confidence that she will be true to her past history to the
end, and when
the liquor traffic shall be outlawed
in every State in the Union, and in the laws and constitution
of the federal government, as it doubtless will be in the near
future, when the good angel of victory shall appear bringing the crown for the most valiant soldier, methinks 1 hear
the unanimous voice rino-ins: out from all divisions of the
one great army : ' Let the crown be placed upon the old blue
banner of the Presbyterian Church, the standard that has
always been in the forefront of the hottest part of the battle,
for she is worthy to receive it.' "
THE

METHODIST

EPISCOPAL

CHURCH.

In the year 1760, John "Wesley, who ranks only less than
the inspired Apostles among the great characters of the
Christian church, wrote the following '' on the sin of distilling and selling spirituous liquors" : " But neither may we
gain by hurting our neighbor in hodi/. Therefore we may
not sell an}'thing which tends to impair health, such as, eminently, all that liquid fire commonly called drams or spirituous liquors. It is true that these may have a place in
medicine
Therefore, such as prepare and sell them
only for that end may keep their conscience clear
But all who sell them in the common way, to any one who
will buy, are ])oisoners in general.
They murder the king's
subjects by wholesale
They drive them to hell like
sheep; — and Avhat is their gain? Who would envy their
large estates and sumptuous palaces? A curse is in the
midst of them — the curse of God cleaves to the stones, the
timber, the furniture of them ! The curse of God is in their
gardens, their walks, their groves — a fire that burns to the
nethermost hell! Blood, hlood, is there; the foundation, the
floor, the ivalls, the roof, are stained until hlood!
And canst

444

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

thou hope, O thou man of blood! though thou art 'clothed
in scarlet and fine linen, and farest sumptuously every day,'
canst thou hope to deliver down thy fields of blood to the
third veneration ? Not so, for there is a God in heaven ;
therefore thy name shall be rooted out. Like as those whom
thou hast destroyed, body and soul, thy memorial shall perish with thee."
Mr. Wesley exhibited the qualities of high statesmanship,
as well as of a Christian teacher, in dealing with the liquor
problem of his day. From 1743, when, by the rules of the
"United Societies of Methodists," " drunkenness, buying or
selling spirituous liquors, or drinking them, except in cases
of extreme necessity," were prohibited, all through his prolonged and unparalleled labors, he denounced the sin of
intemperance, and so bent the twig of Methodism that the
mighty tree inclines only to the right, and gives neither shade
nor shelter to the chief curse of this world, and, so far as
we can judge from the number and fate of its victims, of the
next world also. After giving the facts, Dr. Buckley says :
" Let it, then, be remembered forever that American Methodism began as a total-abstinence society, of the strictest sort,
forbidding the manufacture, the sale or the use of spirituous
liquors, except in cases of extreme necessity. Whoever
violated that rule was subject to discipline and branded as
inconsistent by the general rules, which were read in his
hearing on all important public occasions." Subsequently
there was a partial decline, for this high standard seems to
have taxed poor human nature beyond what, under the temptations of the times, it could bear. For a while, they left
out the word " extreme " before " necessity " ; but in the
General Conference of 1828 it was resolved: "Whereas,
the rules and examples of the Wesleyan Methodists, from
the founding of their existence as a people, both in Europe
and America, were calculated to suppress intemperance, and
to discountenance the needless use of ardent spirits, that all
our preachers and people be expected, and they are hereby
expected, to adhere to their first principles, as contained in
their excellent rules on this subject, and as practiced by our
fathers, and to do all that they prudently can, both by precept and example, to suppress intemperance throughout the

Dr. y. M. Buckley,

Editor of '• The Christian Advocate:'

THE

BAPTIST

CHURCH.

445

land " ;
and "That, to bring about the reformation
desired on this subject, it is important that we neither drink
ourselves (except medicinally) nor give it to visitors or workmen." In 1844 the church divided, and then and subsequently the sentiment of the Methodists, both South and
North, seems to have been for prohibition of the liquor evil
in all its branches. At the first General Conference after the
division, a report was adopted in which the Conference says :
" We proclaim Avith peculiar satisfaction that we now have
Mr. Wesley's rule on spirituous liquors restored to our general rules." "This was done by a vote of 2011 to 21, in
the annual conference " (Dr. Buckley). In 1852, the General Conference rejoiced "greatly,"
especially " that
God has put it in the hearts of civil rulers to interpose the
authority of the State for tlie protection of society against
what we hold to be an enormous social wrong — the manufacture and sale of intoxicating drinks." At nearly if not
quite every General Conference since that time, the same
ground has been taken, and specific things prescribed to be
done, having in view the greater efficiency of the clergy and
the membership in the work of destroying the traffic.
Dr. Buckley writes, in "One Hundred Years of Temperance " : " The ministry and active membership of the
Methodist Episcopal Church are, almost to a man, zealous
advocates of total abstinence. Among the ministers, it
would be difficult to find one who is known to use even
malt liquors as a beverage. Among the people, the general
practice is that of total abstinence. Probably there is no
body of men and women of any considerable size in the
world who purchase and use so small an amount of intoxicating liquors as a beverage
as the Methodist Ej)iscopal
Church
and it stands to-day, in the United States,
as an aggressive force second to none in the efforts to overthrow a system, with its dependent usages, which promotes
every moral and social evil, and produces many misfortunes,
vices and crimes, which, without it, would have no existence."
THE

BAPTIST

CHURCH.

" The Baptist denomination is an archipelago. Each local
church lifts itself independent of every other church

446

THE

TEMPEEANCE

MOVEMENT.

The denomination stands for State rights as opposed to
centralization in church life." This remark of Eev. O. P.
Gifford may explain the reason why in his sketch of the
connection of this powerful and omnipresent denomination
with the temperance movement, he quotes little from representative bodies in regard to its sentiments during the period
of temperance evolution. But the general fact is apparent
that the Baptists, in their several divisions, have been well
to the front in the war against alcohol. Their representative
men have delivered some of the earliest and most decided
utterances upon the subject. Gov. Briggs was President of
the Congressional Temperance Society.
President Wayland wrote to Dr. Justin Edwards in the year
1833 : " I think the prohibition of the traffic in ardent spirits
a fit subject for legislative enactment, and I believe the most
happy results would flow from such prohibition." The
Washingtonian movement was guided and fostered by and
under the preaching of Elder Knapp. The first temperance
paper — the National Philanthropist — was owned and edited
by Kev. William Collier, a Baptist. This paper was established in the year 1826, as noted in the preceding chapter.
It was a very great achievement to catch the spirit of the
press, and yoke its mighty but somewhat reluctant powers to
the car of temperance reform. William Lloyd Garrison,
who was editor of the Philanthropist in 1829, then wrote as
follows: "Prior to that period (1826) intemperance was
seldom a theme for the essayist ; the newspapers scarcely
acknowledged its existence, except occasionally, in connection with some catastrophe or crime, and it did not occur to
any one that a paper devoted mainly to its suppression might
be made a direct and successful eno;ine in the o-reat work of
reform. When this paper was first proposed, it met with a
repulsion which would have utterly discouraged a less zealous
and persevering man than our predecessor. The moralist
looked on doubtfully ; the whole community esteemed the
enterprise desperate. By extraordinary efibrts, and under
appalling disadvantages, the first number was given to the
public ; and since that time it has gradually expanded in size
and increased in circulation, till doubt, and prejudice and
ridicule have been swept away."

Dr. Justin Edwards re-

THE

BAPTIST

CHURCH.

447

ported the First and Second Baptist Churches of Boston, in
1823, as having no member engaged in the liquor traffic, and
the Boston Baptist Bethel has sustained a Monday evening
temperance meeting, every week, for more than forty years,
and has a pledge containing over 20,000 names (" One Hundred Years Temperance," p. 317). In 1835, a New Jersey
association of churches declared " that it is morally wrong
in all, but especially in a professor of religion, to manufacture, vend or use such liquors (intoxicating or alcoholic)
as a common article of luxury or living." It will be observed that this early declaration also includes fermented
drinks within its terms.
They also declare for total abstinence, and for the expulsion from their communion of all who make, vend or use
intoxicating liquors as a common article of luxury or living,
if they should prove to be incorrigible after aft'ectionate and
earnest efforts to reclaim them. From 1883 to the present
time, the State conventions of this great denomination, all
over the country, have been very emphatic for total abstinence and for prohibition. I quote from the resolutions of
the Mississippi convention of 1884 :
" Mesolved, That we raise our uncompromising protest against
the use, manufacture or sale of intoxicatmg liquors as a beverage ;
against the renting of property for tlie manufacture or sale of
intoxicating liquors; the selling of the fruits and cereals to be
manufactured into this beverage ; the signing of whisky j^etitions
or going on the bonds of liquor sellers, and against giving countenance in any way to the iniquitous traffic or use.
'■'•Resolved, That the cause of Christ is greatly injured by
churches retaining in their fellowship whisky sellers, whisky
drinkers, visitors of saloons, and signers of petitions to sell whisky, and those who persist in lending their influence to Satan in
these ways should be brought under church discipline.
" Resolved, That we will use our influence to secure an enforcement of the existing statiites in regard to the traffic in intoxicating beverages, and that we will endeavor to bring about
prohibition as soon as practicable.
That we believe
" First, that the most effectual legal remedy for the manifold
evils of intemperance is constitutional prohibition.
" Second, the licensed liquor traffic to be the enemy of the
church, a disgrace to civilization and humanity.

448

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

" Third, we believe it to be our duty to support for office such
candidates as are in favor of temperance reform, other things
being equal.
^^ Resolved^ That we rejoice at the progress of legal prohibition
in our State and throughout the United States."
What a marvel of completeness and power ! " Only one
thing thou lackest," and that will yet be supplied by the
developing necessities of the case — an emphatic crowning
resolve for national prohibition. A people thus in earnest
will find the way.
Mr. GifFord thus sums up for the Baptist denomination :
"" We have the honor,
"1. Of establishing the first temperance newspaper, and
leading the way to the founding of the Temperance Publication House.
"2. Of one of the first utterances for Prohibition.
"3. Of
"4. Of
" 5. Of
abstinence

originating the Washington movement.
the oldest continuous temperance service.
standing squarely, as a denomination, for total
for the individual and prohibition for the State."
THE REFORMED

DUTCH

CHURCH.

This ancient organization was planted in the New World
from Holland, on the island of Manhattan, as early as the
year 1623. For three centuries at least, this church has
been a deadly foe to the excessive use of intoxicating drinks,
and has forbidden those guilty of such indulgence the sacrament of Holy Communion, and its discipline has been most
rigorously enforced.
In the year 1828, the following declaration was made for
total abstinence :
" Resolved, That the principle adopted by many individuals
and societies, in different parts of the country, for the suppression of intemperance, viz., total abstinence from the use of ardent
spirits, excepting only its use as a medicine, meets with the
decided approbation of this synod."
The records of this church are replete with emphatic
utterances for total abstinence and the promotion of the
great work of temperance reform by every rational means,

THE

CUJIBERLAND

PRESBYTERIAN

from the beginning until now.

CHURCH.

449

Tlie Rev. C. L. Wells, D.D.,

claims for this church that, " in its ministry and membership, itpresents as fair a record for purity, Christly living
and devotion to the welfare of humanity as any church in
this broad land
Wherever a Reformed Dutch Church
is established, there you find earnest advocates of ' law and
order,' of sound reform, of temperance, and determined
opposition to the traffic in intoxicating drink. We claim to
stand among the leaders in this enterprise. Such is the attitude of our church toward this work."
And so we salute thee — venerable ! and without a stain !
THE

CUMBERLAND

PRESBYTERIAN

CHURCH.

This denomination is seventy-seven years old. Born in a
time of general religious and temperance revival, from the
beginning it has been a temperance church.
In the year 1881, the assembly ordered "that our people be advised to favor the passage of prohibitory laws,
and that they vote for men who Avill both make and execute
such laws"; and in 1885 this denomination declared for
national prohibition, with a clearness and emphasis which
entitle it to prominent leadership in the great conflict of the
world. Who shall lead but those who can see? Hear the
assembly ! — After enumerating the various general principles and measures embraced in the movement, they say :
" We should regard the foregoing and other methods of
temperance work as but means to the end at which the special and wonderful movement of the day aims, and that is so
devoutly to be prayed for — the national abolition of the
drink traffic. This is the transcendent issue of the hour."
Rev. J. Reed Morris thus suras up a most interesting sketch :
" Be it observed that ecclesiastical orthodoxy, in this age
of the world, is measured largely by a church's attitude toward the liquor traffic
If, as has been hereinbefore
maintained, this church stands in the front rank of the
great battle-line of the Lord's host, arrayed in fierce conflict against the monster foe, Intemperance, there is no
ground for vain-glory.
"The watchword of the day is — 'Go forward.' Therefore, the imperative demand upon all who are committed to
29

450

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

this transcendent issue is to gird on the armor anew for a
yet mightier onset against a common foe to both civil and
religious interests."
THE

LUTHERAN

CHURCH.

The Lutheran Church is older than the temperance reformation — centuries older than the modern temperance movement for total abstinence and prohibition. It has, however,
thrown the influence of its strong German intellectuality and
deep religious feeling against the drinking tendencies of the
people at all times, and, after the manner of massive natures,
this great church, becoming fairly aroused, has of late years
been among the most radical and advanced of any, in its
expressions and action against the rum traflSc.
In 1871, the General Synod says :
'•''Resolved^ That we are more than ever thoroughly convinced
of the necessity of thoroughly educating the public mind upon
the elementary truths of temperance, by making free and proper
use of the platform, the press and the pulpit ; ... at the same
time we are fully satisfied that judicious legislation is indispensable to complete success, and that we hold ourselves in readiness
to co-operate with the friends of the cause in securing and enforcing such laws as will effectually suppress the evils of intemperance among us."
Since then various State synods have taken strong ground
against the liquor traffic, that of West Pennsylvania being
specially noticeable in its demand for strong prohibitory
legislation, and resolving that " we will continue to protest,
to preach and to pray against the rum traffic, and, under
every favorable opportunity, ive ivill vote as loe jpray,""
Dr. Swartz well says, in concluding his sketch : " Kecognizing the fact that the Lutheran Church in this country is
largely recruited by emigration from the Old World, and that
this foreign element brings with it un-American prejudices
and customs, especially in regard to total-abstinence principles and practice, it is not strange that Lutherans have been
beset with peculiar difficulties and hindrances in achieving a
ftiir standing and making a good record with other less
embarrassed workers in the great temperance reform.
On

THE

SOCIETY

OF

FRIENDS.

451

this very account, however, all the more needful is the
co-operation of the Lutheran bodies with the hosts of temperance workers in other churches. The Lutherans have a
grand mission, and they are nobly and hopefully arising to
meet their peculiar responsibilities. Let them have at once
the sympathies and prayers of all temperance reformers."
THE

SOCIETY

OF FRIENDS.

The Quakers originated in England, about 1660. They
have always been pronounced in their opposition to war, the
slave trade, slavery and intemperance. The society is
separated into subdivisions called yearly meetings, which are
the law-makers and governmg body, independent of each
other, but having a fraternal and advisory relation, which is
maintained by correspondence. I will cite from the recent
declarations of these meetings, to show the attitude of the
society toward the traffic in alcohol.
In the year 1874, the yearly meeting of New England
appointed a committee to " put forth earnest efforts to suppress the wicked traffic in intoxicating drinks," and an
appropriation was made to their use. In 1876 are reported
labors to promote constitutional prohibition, scientific instruction in schools, etc. The Philadelphia yearly meeting and
ten others in various States occupy substantially the same
ofrounds as that of New Eng-land, above cited. Durinfj most
of the historv of the society it has been consistently opposed
to intemperance, and, by the sincerity and honesty of life
manifested in their intercourse with the people, a strong
influence for temperance has been exerted in favor of the
temperance cause by this class of Christians. The particular action of each yearh^ meeting for many 3'ears is faithfully
given by Mr. William Egerton in " One Hundred Years of
Temperance."
THE

UNITED

BRETHREN

IN

CHRIST.

This denomination was organized in the j^ear 1800, in a
dwelling over the store-room of a distillery which belonged
to one of the brethren.
In 1821, the Third General Conference

resolved

"that

452

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

neither preachers nor lay members shall be allowed to carry
on a distillery
and that it shall be the duty of the
preachers to labor against the evils of intemperance." In
1833, the General Conference adopted a rule making it an
offense, punishable with expulsion, for an exhorter, preacher
or elder to manufacture or sell ardent spirits, and gave a
3^ear's grace wherein those so engaged could close out their
business. In 1848, the use, as well as the manufacture and
sale, was forbidden to all members.
In 1881, the General Conference said: "We will not
relax our efforts until constitutional prohibition shall be
secured in every State of this our great domain." In 1885,
the same position was reaffirmed, and the church urged " to
strive in every legitimate way to secure constitutional prohibition, both State and national."
The Rev. E. S. Lorenz sums up as follows: "But
whether identified with the political party or not, all United
Brethren are Prohibitionists, and can be depended upon to
vote right when constitutional prohibition is offered to the
people
Not a century old by half a generation, the
Church of the United Brethren in Christ is fully abreast,
clergy and laity, with the most advanced results of the
closing century of temperance work, and promises to do no
mean share of the work which the opening century is pledged
to accomplish."
THE

" DISCIPLES

OF

CHRIST."

This denomination was organized in the year 1811, and
already has about six hundred thousand members. It is
one of the most active, and may yet become one of the most
powerful, in Christendom. As a body, the " Disciples " are
strongly against the evil of intemperance, but have made less
explicit declarations against it through their conventions than
most other denominations, because of the strictness with
which their constitution excludes the consideration of questions not wholl}^ and directly relating to matters devout.
But the general expression of individual membership, as
obtained by Mr. F. M. Green, is for total abstinence and
prohibition, and they favor political action of a radical
character.

THE

UNIVERSALIST

CHURCH.

THE

UNIVERSALIST

CHURCH.

453

This church was organized in 1790, and in the year 1800,
in order to avoid the appearance of evil in assembling at
taverns, where liquor was generally abundant, the Convention resolved " that the council of the Convention do assemble in future at the private house of a brother or sister, as it
becometh us to abstain from the appearance of evil." In
1835 strong temperance resolutions were adopted by the
General Convention. In 1856, the General Convention
classed slavery and intemperance together, and insisted that
" the enormous evils " arising from both " are themes within
the domain of the moral and religious teacher" ; and in various State conventions, from time to time, total abstinence
and legal prohibition have been strongly endorsed, and,
within the last few years, prohibition by constitutional law.
Eev. Edwin Thompson has been one of the most active and
important laborers in the temperance reform. It was of him
that, when some spoke of him as the "main spoke in the
Avheel," Dr. Lyman Beechcr exclaimed, "Indeed, it seems to
me that he has been the hul) and all the spokes, and a considerable part of the rim!" Rev. Dr. Chapiu Avill be
remembered as for years the most eloquent American divine,
and very prominent in the temperance reform, Avhile Dr. A.
A. Miner, " who conducted for the people of Massachusetts,
before the legislative committee, the defense of prohi])ition
against the assaults of Gov. Andrew, and is now president
of the Massachusetts Alliance," is fittingly designated as the
"unequalled champion of radical temperance measures in
New England." Dr. Richard Eddy's sketch is much more
full than the few facts which I have gleaned from it. This
denomination has many distinguished names of men honorably connected with the temperance movement, among whom
it would be injustice should I omit to mention that of Dr.
Eddy himself.
THE METHODIST

PROTESTANT

CHURCH.

This church was organized in 1830. Its first " deliverance " against intemperance was made, as follows, by

454

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

the General Conference which framed its Constitution and
Discipline :
" 1. Mesolved, That the efforts of the friends of temperance
to promote entire abstinence from the use of ardent spirits, except
as a medicine, meet our cordial approbation.
" 2. Resolved^ That we deeply regret that any professed
Chi'istians should at this day, and under the lights which Providence has furnished, continue to manufacture, vend or use ardent
spirits.
"3. Resolved^ That we earnestly hope that the making, vending and using of distilled liquors, as an article of luxury or diet,
will be abandoned by all the friends of the Kedeemer, throughout
the world."
Fifty years later the General Conference declared, " The
manufacture, sale and use of intoxicating liquors, as a beverage, is a violation of the teaching of the Bible, and is
opposed to the best interests of our country " ; in favor of
"moral suasion " and "legal prohibition," and that "total
abstinence from alcoholic beverages is the Bible rule of
temperance."
And again, in 1884 :
" Resolved, That we believe that the most successful way to
suppress the traffic in intoxicants is constitutional prohibition."
The resolutions of the annual conferences of this church
have been numerous, progressive, earnest and, finally, radical, in opposition to the liquor trafiic, and, in the words of
Eev. B. F. Benson, "these successive deliverances, running
from 1830 to the present time, exhibit the gradual development of temperance doctrines, from a mild form of persuasion,
in which Christian people are advised not to sell or drink
intoxicating spirits, to the most positive denunciation of their
use as utterly inconsistent with the Christian profession, and
the sale as a crime against society, which, like other crimes,
should be prohibited by the laws of the land. And this
latter is the position of the Methodist Protestant Church at
this time."
THE CONGREGATIONAL

CHURCHES.

These churches are independent Christian republics.
They have not even a federal union, and, living almost
always in peace, they have no articles of confederation for

George A. Bailey,
Head of the Good Templars in A''ew Haf/ipshtre.

THE COXGEEGATIOXAL

CHURCHES.

455

times of war. But their form of clmrcli government and tlie
town-meeting system have been the very cliarters and working models of freedom. To borrow an ecclesiastical term,
they are the " deliverances " of liberty. National meetings
are rare with this denomination. Dr. Langworthy saj's
(p. 377 " One Hundred Years Temperance ") : "Our conferences, associations, and councils are simply advisory. For
more than a century we had no gathering, elective or
otherwise, that could be called national."
For this reason it will not be possible to gather the history of the temperance sentiment of this denomination from
general declarations of large representative bodies. But
many of the most pronounced leaders of the temperance
movement have been and are anions;' the leaders of this
faith, and the church membership is generally quite as radical in opposition to the traffic as are their representative
men. Rev. Heman Humphrey, for twenty-two years president of Amherst College, preached a series of six temperance sermons in the year 1810, "probably the first series
ever preached." In 1813, he published six articles in the
Panoplu't, on " the cause, origin, eflfects and remedy of intemperance intiic United States."
I do not know how the fact has been with re£i;ard to the
intervening presidents of that institution, but I gladly embrace this opportunity to testify of the eminent scholar and
nobFe man who now presides over it, that, much as the college may have gained, the country and its councils lost still
more when he left the public service for that of this important seat of learning. ]Morc than anything whatever this
nation needs radical, determined and able public men
devoted to the cause of national prohibition, and especially
are they needed on the floor of Congress ! Great as will be
the influence of Dr. Seelye upon the present and future of
the country in his present career, having known him in his
congressional life, I can not but regret the loss in that arena
of his great powers and his conscientious devotion to duty
in every good cause, and especially to the great temperance
movement of this age, and of all ages, of which he is so well
fitted to become the national champion.
Jeremiah Evarts, Esq., treasurer of the A. B. C. F. M.,

456

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

and father of Senator Evarts, became editor of the PanopUst
in the year 1810, published many articles which greatly
assisted the cause in that early day , and was very active in
the work of temperance organization. Rev. Calvin Hill
advocated total abstinence from spirituous liquors, as early
as 1812 ; and Rev. Roswell Swan was among the very
earliest advocates of total abstinence — and he himself
abstained.
Dr. Lyman Beecher was in his day — and it was a long one
— probably the most influential of the leaders in temperance
work.
Of Rev. Justin Edwards, D.D., it is said that he was a
wise and fearless worl?;er in the temperance cause, and
was the chief promoter of the organization of the American
Temperance Society, in 1816. Rev. Dr. Hewett, Rev. John
Marsh, D.D,, Rev. Samuel Worcester, D.D., President Day
of Yale College, President Lord of Dartmouth College, President Hitchcock of Amherst College, President Appleton of
Bowdoin, Prof. Moses Stuart of Andover, Dr. Leonard
Woods, Hon. Neal Dow, Henry Wilson, Vice-President of
the United States, John B. Gough, Charles Jewett, M.D.,
Rev. George B. Cheever, author of " Dea. Giles' Distillery,"
and many others, were men without whom it is impossible to
conceive of the temperance movement. It is difficult to
overestimate the importance of the services of this body of
great men to the cause. .
Dr. Langworthy well says : " To have had the first organized temperance society in the world, and the first series of
temperance sermons ever preached, and the first total-abstinence society ever formed, is a thrilling summons to all Congregationalists to follow more closely in the footsteps of their
own noble leaders "
THE

PROTESTANT

EPISCOPAL,

CHURCH.

This church has perhaps formerly been more conservative,
or at least less demonstrative, in its relations to the temperance movement than most others, but never indifi*erent to it;
and, during the last few years, has become very active in the
promotion of measures for individual reform, and to prevent
the young from being " led into temptation."

The organi^ia-

THE

EPISCOPAL,

CHURCH.

457

tion of the American Church Temperance Society utilizes the
abilities and resources of all who are Avilling to oppose the
evils of intemperance, whether in their personal habits they
be abstainers or otherwise, the basis on which the work of
the society is conducted being " union and co-operation, on
perfectly equal terms, for the promotion of temperance, of
those who use temperatelj'- and those who abstain entirely
from intoxicating- drinks as beverages."
And as to
means it is said : " Supreme above all others we recognize
the grace of God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, as the
means by which the reform of the intemperate is to be
sought." Dr. Da Costa gives a minute and valuable account
of the working of this society, and of the growing energy
with which the deep piety and vast power of this great branch
of the Christian church is being concentrated in practical
ways for the destruction of the Uquor traffic. It can not be
long before it will be found in the front rank of the battle ;
and, when it gets there, it will come with steady, organized
and irresistible force.
Dr. Da Costa says (p. 383, "One Hundred Years," etc.) :
" The condition of the temperance work in the Protestant
Episcopal Church at the present time may not be expressed
adequately in statistics, and the effort, therefore, is not
attempted. It may be said, however, that the leaven is
gradually leavening the whole lump ; and that, passing beyond
the bounds of the body in connection with which it was
organized, the Church Temperance Society is affecting the action of many kindred societies, and becoming a powerful
factor in temperance work all over the land. It owes its
strength and efficiency, first of all, to the deeply religious
spirit in which the movement was conceived ; and, secondly,
to its policy in combining men of diverse views, who are
nevertheless agreed respecting the common end. The
society accepts the help of all, in whatsoever degree it may
be offered, and engages in controversy with none."
Of this society, the late Hon. William E. Dodge said
that its organization formed " one of the most important and
beneficial events of the present century."

458

THE

THE

TEMPERANCE

GERMAN

MOVEMENT.

REFORMED

CHURCH.

The Eev. W. C. Hendrickson, in his sketch of this church,
says that " it is one of the oldest religious denominations in
this country," and that "the progress of the temperance
cause during the last hundred years is a marked feature in its
history. Many of the fathers now living remember when
intoxicating liquors were freely used upon all churchly occasions, and considered as one of the spiritual influences required to stimulate church Avork
It was not considered a misdemeanor to give a sufficient amount to create the
happy feeling.'' Thus it appears that, in common with
others, Christian ceremonies in this church were celebrated
in a manner not inconsistent with the rites of a heathen
divinity. See now w^hat has happened. Within the last ten
years, the General Synods held at Tiffin, Ohio, denounced
^' especially the monster evil, intemperance " ; in 1884, the
General Synod at Baltimore reaffirmed the same action, and
within a few years the Eastern Synod held at Bellefontaine,
Pa., and the Western Synod have adopted the following
" strono; deliverance " :
" Whereas^ the almost incredible amount of $500,000,000 is annually expended in the United States for intoxicating liquors; and
whereas, one half of the taxes levied on the people of the United
States are directly chargeable to the use of alcoholic beverages ;
and whereas, the most appalling amount of crime, suffering and
disgrace is caused by the liquor traffic; and whereas, the efforts
hitherto made have failed to furnish an adequate remedy ; therefore,
'■'■liesolved, That the synod favors the total prohibition of the
manufacture and sale of intoxicating drinks as a beverage, by constitutional amendment.
'■'Mesohed, That the synod earnestly desires its pastors, elders,
deacons and people to continue to use all proper means to educate
the public mind and conscience to the approval of this remedy."
Like action has been taken by the synods of Ohio and
Pittsburg, and such is the present attitude of the Reformed
Church. National prohibition is the crowning conception of
temperance reform ; save only international prohibition, coverins' the whole world.
Amen.

THE

BIBLE

CHRISTIAN

CHURCH.

THE

BIBLE

CHRISTIAN

CHURCH

459

antedates the other Christian churches, probably, "in the
adoption of total abstinence from all intoxicating liquors "
as a condition of membership. The Rev. William Cowherd
organized such a church in the year 1809.
In 1823, Rev. AYilliam Metcalfe published a tract "on
the duty of entire abstinence from all intoxicating drinks." —
This includes fermented drinks, as well as ardent spirits. —
He inculcates '' entire abstinence from this baneful liquor,"
and declares : — " The accursed bcverao'es ouo;ht never to
gain admittance to our dwellings ; and, if possible, ive
should not even hear their names.'"
Rev. Henry S. Clubb informs us that this is believed to
be the first tract pubh'shcd in the countiy " inculcating
entire abstinence from intoxicating liquors " ; and that the
Bible Christian Church has never permitted " intoxicating
liquors within its walls." Pride in such a record can not be
a sin.
THE

^MORAVIAN

CHURCH.

The Moravians are for temperance. In 1873, the American Synod takes this position: "It is opposed to all
traffic in intoxicating drinks, and the use as a l)everage of
hard cider, beer, ale, whisky, Avine, l)randy, gin, rum,
patent bitters, etc., and would respectfully urge all the members of our church to abstain therefrom " — and in the year
1884 the synod reaffirmed the same. As a denomination,
the ^Moravians are in favor of legal measures for the suppression of intemperance and of the manufacture and sale of
intoxicating drinks. Rev. J. Ta^dor Hamilton has compiled
the resolutions of synods and other matter demonstrating the
attitude of this most interestino^ branch of the Christian
Church.
THE

REFORMED

EPISCOPAL

CHURCH,

as shown by Rev. AV. T. Sabine, holds advanced gi'ound
upon the temperance question. In 1873, the General
Council resolved that it '' marks with pleasure the progress
of the temperance revival throughout the country, and
desires to put on record its sympathy
with that great

460

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

movement, as ordered and blessed of God, and hereby
affectionately recommends this cause to the co-operation
of the clergy and laity of this church" ; and in 1885 places
on record like declarations, and urges total abstinence
" from the traffic and use of all intoxicating liquors."
THE

SEVENTH-DAY

BAPTISTS.

Dr. A. H. Lewis has made up the record of this church,
and concludes it thus : " The foregoing are representative
official utterances by the General Conference of the SeventhDay Baptists in the United States. They show that the
denomination is a unit, and is radically committed to the
fundamental doctrines of total abstinence for the individual
and total prohibition for the State."
Amen and Amen.
THE

UNITARIAN

CHURCH.

As with the Congregationalists, the record and the present
position of the Unitarians upon the temperance movement
are to be found less in what its representative bodies have
said than in what its representative men and w'omen have
both said and done. Tried by this test, no denomination
has been more active in the cause. But its representative
bodies have not been silent.
As a fair specimen of the action of its ministerial associations, Iquote the following, from resolutions passed by the
Association of Norfolk County, Mass., in the year 1882 :
" Whereas, we look upon intemperance in the use of ardent
spirits as the source of untold evils, in the forms of poverty,
ignorance, wretchedness and crime, therefore,
'■'-Resolved, That we urge upon all Christian people and good
citizens the duty of renewed and persistent efforts to discountenance and discourage the use of intoxicating liquors merely as an
indulgence of the appetite, and to deepen and strengthen the
sentiment in behalf of temperance in the community
'■'■Resolved, That we favor legislation looking to the total suppression of the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors for
use as a beverage ; that we are in favor of as stringent laws as
can be executed, and that we hope to see a law upon the statutebook, sustained by public sentiment, which shall make public
drinking-places impossible."

THE

UNITARIAN

CHURCH.

461

In 1872, the national conference declared it to be duty to
do all that can be done, by voice and pen, by life and example, to "arrest and destroy this mighty foe of civilization,"
and in 1884 it declared that, " under all the conditions of
modern society, we believe that nothing short of a total disuse of intoxicating beverages can serve as a sure means of
abolishing and preventing the miseries and evils of intemperance."
Dr. Lowell, Dr. Channing, Dr. Henry AVare, Jr., Rev.
Samuel J. May, Rev. John Pierpont, William G. Elliott, D.D., well known throuijhout the Mississippi Valley,
Dr. Gannett and many others, who have passed awaj^, were,
in their time, among the great champions of temperance
reform.
Of the living, the Rev. Edward Everett Hale, the —
but the time and space would fail me to write the names
which belong on the brilliant roll of mighty men and women
who are now at the forefront of battle in this temperance
war — and what is true of the clergy is equally true of the
laity of this denomination.
I shall be pardoned if I mention by name Henry H. Faxon
of Quiiicy, whose intense zeal has never lacked for discretion,
and who has beaten the devil so far every time, and, whenever it was necessary, has done it with his own tire. A
practical man, who sees to it that those who take the sword
perish by the sword. Ten such men would save the United
States.
Of 'Sirs.which
Mary isA.dueLivermore
withminds
the respectful
reverence
to one of Ithewrite
ablest
of either
sex, adorned with all the graces and angelic excellencies of
her own. Her services to the cause of temperance and its
great companion, the full suffrage, so that the freedom of the
race may be complete, have not been surpassed.
Rev. S. W. Bush, Avho has prepared a very interesting
review of the work and position of the denomination, concludes thus : " Whatever real service this body of Christians has rendered to the temperance cause, just so far has it
aided in the establishment among men of the kingdom of
God."

462

THE

TEMPERANCE

THE

FEEE

BAPTIST

MOVEMENT.

CHURCH.

This denomination has always been in the advance of
every reform. They belong to the light infantry — the
Zouaves of heaven. Nor are they without cavalry and heavy
artillery — an army complete, without bummers or stragglers,
always fighting or on the march for another battle.
In the year 1828, the General Conference resolved "that
we advise the members of our churches to abstain from
the use of ardent spirits, on all occasions except when they
are necessary as a medicine."
In 1837, they adopted a still stronger resolution, and
spoke thus of the traffic : " The vending of intoxicating
liquors is productive of poverty, ignorance, suffering, vice
and crime of every description ; also of disease and death ;
that the dealer in intoxicating drinks is therefore responsible
for the evils of ivhich he is knowingly , unnecessarily and
voluntarily the author, and shoidd be regarded by the community as guilty of all the misery, crime and death which
he produces; that our law-givers shoidd, by the enactment of
just laws, protect the community from this baneful and merciless traffic.''''
In 1853, the General Conference resolved "that the
traffic in intoxicating liquors is, in its nature, nearly allied to
theft and robbery ; and in its consequences far exceeds
them in enormity. That, while we do not discard moral
suasion, but consider it an ally essential to the greatest ability of laws ; yet, in our opinion, nothing but a prohibitory
law enforced, and embodying the principles of the Maine
law, will effectually suppress the abominable liquor traffic."
On the organization of a Catholic Temperance Society in
Dover, N. H., the Morning Star, the organ of the denomination, with a Christian liberality which points out the existence of feelings that should lead to the reunion of the o^reat
wings of Christendom in one grand array, published the following : " We rejoice at the stand our Catholic neighbors
are taking ao:ainst the use of all intoxicatino- drinks
The effectual remedy for intemperance is total abstinence
from all intoxicating drinks."
Rev. B. D. Peck, D.D., in his sketch,

arranges many

THE

CHRISTIAN

CHURCH.

463^

instances showins^ the red-hot enersfy of the leaders of this
denomination in the temperance work. One of them says :
" I identify myself with this reform, for better or for worse.
Dear as is the blood which com'ses in my veins, I stand or
fall with it." Another " took a load of barley ten miles to
market ; and when he learned that it was to be made into
intoxicating liquors, he said to the purchaser, ' You can not
have my barley for such a purpose, ' reloaded it, and took
it home, preferring to lose it rather than receive money from
such a business." No wonder that Neal Dow saj^s : " I have
been well acquainted with the position of the Free Baptist
denomination on the subject of temperance and prohibition,
from the beginning of the organizations
and I do
not remember one who was not thorouHilv a friend of this
great movement, as they are to-day

Witliout them,

the cause would not stand wJiere it does to-day." And to this
I will add that witJi them it ivill not remain where it is to-day ;
it will march steadily on to the perfect day of national and
international proh ihition.
THE

CHRISTIAN

CHURCH.

The Quadrennial Convention of this church, held in the
year 1882, adopted the following report on temperance :
'■'■Whereas, Intemperance is the greatest evil of tlie age, and
liquor-selling the 'crime of crimes' against God and man; therefore,
" 1. Hesolved, That the United States government ouoht at
once to withdraw its sanction and support from the manufacturers
and traffickers in intoxicating liquors.
" 2. That we favor, and will heartily work for, Constitutional
amendments in the various States where w^e reside, until the prohibition of the manufacture and sale of all intoxicants as beverages is an accomplished fact.
" 3. That, in all future political action, we will carefully consider our relation to the cause of temperance, and will insist that
men and parties claiming our support shull stand square on this
vital subject.
"4. That we condemn, as contrary to the Christian life, tlie
renting of buildings for the manufacture and sale of intoxicating
beverages.
" 5. That we will, as far as possible, co-operate with all churches,.

464

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

societies and individuals in advancing the true temperance cause,
as voiced in the motto,
'"Total abstinence for the individual and total prohibition for
the State.' "
The Rev. B. F. Knapp says "that no retrograde step
has been taken
but it" any difference upon the temperance question, by that body, its words upon it have since
then been still more outspoken and emphatic
and
that the present status of the Christian Church upon the
temperance issue is of more healthful and vigorous growth,
and that, too, from the prohibition stand-point, both by State
and nation, than at any period during the century of its
church work, ' and for which I feel to render praise to
Almighty God.' "
THE

CHURCH

OF

GOD.

The Rev. Geo. Sigler furnishes a sketch (see " One Hundred Years," etc., p. 412) quite full as to the attitude of this
denomination upon the temperance question, showing that it
is well advanced and strong for total abstinence and for prohibitory legislation in state and nation. Some of its utterances are very emphatic. In one they say " that, since
those who are engaged in the liquor trafic have formed combinations inthe interests of this iniquitous work, it becomes
the duty of the friends of temperance to lay aside all sectarian and political prejudices and unite in one solid compact
by which they may counteract the influence of these organizations — either by demanding of existing political parties further legislation, or hy constituting a party whose ultimate end
shall be the entire prohibition of the liquor traffic.''^
The utterances of this denomination upon the work of
woman and her influence, as well as upon the temperance
question, show that it is living in modern times, and is
full of energy for the great deeds of the coming years.
THE

UNITED

PRESBYTERIAN

CHURCH.

This is one of the very youngest of the denominations,
having been organized in the year 1858. Her first General
Assembly :

THE

AFRICAN

M. E. ZION

CHURCH.

465

'■'■Hesolved, 1st, That the business of manufacturing and vending
intoxicating liquors for drinking purposes is injurious to the best
interests of society, and therefore inconsistent with the laws of
God, which require, ' Thou slialt love thy neighbor as thyself.' "
In 1877, the General Assembly :
'■'■Mesohed^ That the license of the traffic is incompatible -with
the welfare of the State ; and that the State should seek its entire
prohibition."
In 1885 :
" That there can be no compromise with this evil ; that absolute,
unconditional prohibition is
the ultimatum which alone
we are willing to accept."
Rev. J. T. McCrary concludes his able sketch as follows :
"As to the present sentiment of the church, -we may speak
quite definitely. Direct information from pastors in all
parts of the church warrants the conclusion that the sentiment in favor of total abstinence and prohibition among the
people is almost unanimous. Three-fourths of the ministers
heard from favor the formation of a Prohibition party, and
act with the third party
May God grant that
before the United Presbyterian Church celebrates her semicentennial she may, with all Christian people of this land,
be called upon to rejoice in the triumph of the cause of
Prohibition."
THE

AFRICAN

METHODIST

EPISCOPAL

ZION CHURCH

was organized in 1796 by colored Wesleyans. Their membership is at least 300,000, and has increased with great
rapidity in the South since the abolition of slavery. The
Hon. John C. Dancy has written a most interesting account
of this church and its astonishing development :
"Rt. Rev. J. W.Hood, one of the present Board of Bishops, and
Prof. Jos. C. Price, President of Zion Wesley College, at Salisbury, N. C, are foremost among the tern iterance advocates of
this country, each having been heard on two continents — the latter being one of the most forcible tempei-ance orators now livino-.
Bisho}) Hood was at one time Grand Chaplain of the Independent
Order of Good Templars of the Right Worthy Grand Lodge of the
World. — Bishop J. J. Moore, D.D., is also a member of the Order
30

466

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

of Good Templars, having been initiated by the Chief OjBScers of
Great Britain.
"While Bishops S. T. Jones, D.D., Thomas H.
Loraax, and J. P. Thompson
are none the less fearless
and uncompromising in their advocacy of temperance principles.
To the promotion and success of the great movement they seem to
have consecrated their lives, their best efforts, and the influence
of their Christian example. Rev. C. R. Harris, the next highest
officer, is a Good Templar and a total abstainer, and works unremit ingly inbehalf of the cause. The Star of Zion, the organ of
the connection, is dedicated to Temperance, Education, Morality,
Industrial Progress and Religion
Every member of the
faculty of Zion Wesley College is a temperance man, and every
student is required to abstain from the use of all intoxicating
beverages."
This church " has declared in favor of total abstinence for
the individual and opposition to intemperance on the part of
the church." It is an immense power not alone with its own
race, but among the white race as well. No man ever
addressed white audiences with greater force and more thrilling effect than Rev. Dr. Price during his recent visit to the
city of New York.
THE

AFRICAN

METHODIST

EPISCOPAL

CHURCH

was organized in 1816, by Rev. Richard Allen and Absalom
Jones, and one of the provisions engrafted on the constitution
forbade drunkenness, and the drinking of spirituous liquors
unless ordered to do so by a physician. " Nor did the church
veer from it one hair's-breadth while the old hero, Rev. Mr.
Allen, lived ; nor has it veered since
No drunkards !
no drinkers !" In 1833, the Ohio Conference resolved, "as
the sense of this conference, that common schools, Sundayschools and temperance societies are of the highest importance to all people, but more especially to us as a people."
The Philadelphia and New York conferences also strongly
endorsed the temperance cause.
Rev. Dr. Tanner says : " The church, in the fifty years
since these utterances were given, has multiplied her conferences by ten ; then there were four, now there are forty-four.
If we were to say that in intention to put down the rum
fiend we, as a church, have kept full pace with our material
growth, the fact would not be too strongly put.
No session

Mrs. M. A. Bent,
Comet ist, National

IT. C. T.

U,

THE

EVANGELICAL

ASSOCIATION.

467

of the conference is now held, anywhere within our borders,
that rum ravages upon society, morally and religiously, socially and civilly, are not duly and carefully considered.
This church now comprises four hundred thousand members,
and is a mighty force for good in our country and world."
THE

EVANGELICAL

ASSOCIATION

began with the century, and is described by Eev. G. W. Gross
as " a child of Providence, called into existence by the Great
Head of the church and by the force of circumstances," and
similar in organization and church polity to the Methodist
Episcopal Church. " It has an aggressive spirit, and claims to
be in the pioneer corps of every moral reform." It has 130,000 members. The denomination is in itself a total-abstinence
society, and is committed to the principles of absolute and
everlasting prohibition of the liquor traffic.
The Pennsylvania conference, the oldest of the church,
passed the following resolutions in 1835 :
" Whej'eas, King Alcohol, the great destroyer of our fair land,
is, notwithstanding the strenuous and multiplied efforts put forth
against him, constantly enlarging his soul and body destroying
work; and whereas his most loyal subjects, the distillers, brewers
and saloonists, are every year becoming more solidified and determined in their opposition to the passage of temperance and
Sunday laws ; therefore,
" Mesolved, That we will, more than ever, devote our energies
to the dethronement of this mighty foe. That for this purpose
we will employ all fair and honorable means — such as the dissemination ofsound temperance literature, the preaching of totalabstinence sermons, and the thorough indoctrination of the youth
in our Sunday-schools.
'■'■Hesolved^ That Ave are in favor of constitutional prohibition.
'■'•Resolved^ That we consider it a violation of the spirit of our
' Discipline ' for any of our members either to sign applications
for liquor license or to rent their property for the sale of liquors.
'■'- Hesolved, That toe consider the use of fermented wine in the
Sacrament of the Lord''s Supper contrary to the total-abstinence
principles of our church.''''
It would seem strange had Christ adopted "what would
be a sin if it were not a sacrament, and ordain it as the
great institution by which to be remembered himself!

468

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Mr. Gross says : '' Many, if not most, of the more active,
enthusiastic temperance workers give great prominence to
the legislative and political phases of the question, and believe that license, high or low, can not be encouraged on
any moral pretext of reaching the evil ; but believe in the
inherent wrongfulness of all liquor manufacturing and vending for drinking purposes, and do in no way sanction or
countenance the part taken in the traffic by local. State or
national authority."
This association is not one of the larger denominations,
but it is of the kind of whom one member will chase a thousand and two put ten thousand to flight.
THE REFORMED

PRESBYTERIAN

CHURCH.

This church is the lineal descendent of the Covenanters of
Scotland, so it is claimed by the Kev. T. P. Stevenson, who
furnishes a brief but most interesting sketch. Eighty-two
years since, "her supreme court decided that slaveholding
was a crime, and appointed a commission to give effect to this
decision in her congregations in the Southern States
and all her members who had acquired property in slaves set
them at liberty at this behest. In something the same
spirit she has dealt with intemperance." All through her
history she has been clear, and radically opposed to this sin.
In the year 1885, the synod declared that the temperance issue
has come to the hour for its final decisive struggle, " when the
facts are fully known ; when all expedients have utterly failed ;
and when enlightened and matured public sentiment seeks
to crystallize in the form of law, for the absolute and complete suppression of the evil." In such conflicts "the church
is not a mere pulsometer, to measure moral forces ; she is a
living organism to originate and sustain them. The fact that
a question has assumed a political and legislative aspect does
not carry it out of the sphere of the church's action. The
theory that, as soon as a moral issue becomes a political one,
the church has nothing more to do with it, is political atheism. It is the theory that God and his law have no relation
to the State. This is the hour of the church's high opportunity and grave responsibility. The Christian ministry
and the religious press can not keep silent on a false plea of

THE

METHODIST

CHURCH

SOUTH.

469

non-partisansJiip while Christian men administer ivicked
license laivs and sustain parties that are in alliance ivith the
liquor traffic.''^
The whole license system is denounced as " wrong in principle and most pernicious in practice, involving the nation in
the guilt and shame of the liquor traffic, to which it gives its
consent ; as Ineifectual for the restraint or suppression of the
evil, and an utter violation of the high trust God has committed to civil government as His ordinance " ; and they
recommend all the women of the church to " co-operate with
the Woman's Christian Temperance Union in its noble work
of faith and labor of love." In short, I have read nothing
in the declarations of any denomination written with more
absolute disregard of the tenderest sensibilities of those
engaged in the prosecution or in the hypocritical encouragement of the liquor traffic, than the utterances of these modern
Scotch Covenanters.
THE

METHODIST

EPISCOPAL

CHURCH

SOUTH.

The declarations of the great Southern branch of the
Methodist Church have always been very clear and emphatic
in denunciation of indulgence in intoxicating drinks, and in
the inculcation of total abstinence from the use and participation in the manufacture or sale by its preachers and members.
The temperance sentiment is "intense." "The Southern
Methodist Church is really an immense prohibition society."
" In the last few years our people have come to believe
that the evils growing out of the manufacture, sale and
drinking of intoxicating liquors are of such dimensions and
significance that specific action and laws are demanded Avith
reference to them. The church has come to consider intemperance the greatest evil of the times — the source and cause
of well nigh all the other evils which affect society and
impede the progress of church w^ork."
In 1882, the North Georgia annual conference adopted a
report of Dr. A. G. Haygood, unanimously, in which they
declare, among other things, "that it is now understood by
all informed persons that the great majority of crimes have
their genesis in drunkenness, and that nearly all crimes of
violence are traceable to this source.
Our jails and peniten-

470

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

tiaries are filled from the bar-rooms and other places where
intoxicating liquors are sold
By every token it appears to your committee that it is the duty of all good men to
unite in all wise and practicable methods for the suppression
of the traffic. They also rejoice in the obviously growing
sentiment in favor of the prohibition of the traffic that has
wrought so much evil in the world.' In the year 1883 the
conference denounces the traffic, and "thanks God" for
encouraging indications : " local prohibition is sweeping over
Georgia," etc. In 1884, the same conference resolves
" that we regard prohibition the only rational and practical
solution of the liquor problem. 2. That we will use our
influence to create, organize and intensify prohibition sentiment
4. That we will endeavor to have all prohibitory laws in the different counties of the State enforced."
The status of the whole forty conferences is indicated by
the sentiments of the one from whose declarations these quotations are made :
" The Southern Methodist Church is a unit in its opinion on
this subject. Our people throughout the church have reached
the deliberate conclusion that prohibition is the only feasible
solution of the liquor problem, and they do not propose to
cease their efforts until the whole South is solid on this line."
As a Northern man, I beo- our Southern friends to enlaro^e
their sphere of action, to take in the North also, and continue
their efforts until both North and South are solid on the
same line of prohibition — even national prohibition. " Come
over into Macedonia and help us ! " I get this information
from Kev. J. W. Lee's most excellent sketch in " One Hundred Years of Temperance," and feel that the following
quotation should also be given, for the benefit of — everybody. He says : " Prohibition, as it presents itself to the
minds of our people, is not so complex and delicate a question as it appears to be in many of the Northern States.
We think this is due to the fact that, with us, prohibition
has not become entangled with party issues nor blended
with political measures and promises. We have not permitted the politicians to complicate it with Democracy or
Republicanism, or with the measures of any party
It is a pity that anywhere this, the most important of moral

THE

PEOTESTANT

CHURCH

UNANIMOUS.

471

and social questions, should be tacked on to a political party.
.... It is the earnest conviction of the Southern Methodist Church, then, that this question must be settled outside
of political parties." He cites the result in Atlanta as an
example of non-partisan success for prohibition.
It will be fortunate indeed when the prohibition sentiment
is so strong that all parties compete for the first opportunity
to deposit their votes for prohibition. But in some parts of
the country no party will adopt prohibition ; on the contrary,
all parties strive to exclude it from the sphere of political
action, which may be very diflferent from partisan action.
The body-politic must act, or there can be no law. K
there be strong opposition, there will be parties. So far, at
the North, the temperance issue has been in search of a large
party for its father. Sometimes, generally, the Republican
party has been kindl}'^ disposed, but, at best, prohibition has
been much out in the cold.
Prohibition will have ample accommodations, with all the
modern improvements, in this country yet. If neither of
the old parties will take her in, and treat her as one of the
family, she will build a house to suit herself. In fact, she
has already put up one wing of a building, with the largest
plan, out of material obtained by tearing down portions of
the houses whose occupants exclude her. The end is not yet.
That party is wise which first gives her a permanent home.
Mr. Lee concludes thus ; " We think it about time for the
people of these United States to know that they have the
power to rid themselves of the evil of intemperance. And
as long as they have this power, and do not use it, they are
responsible for the drunkenness, and the crimes growing out
of drunkenness, which disgrace us."
"And Nathan said unto David, ' Thou art the man ! ' "
I have now stated the position of all the leading Protestant
denominations of our country upon the temperance question.
That position is almost unanimous for total abstinence of the
individual and total prohibition by the law of the land.
Here, then, is the solid Protestant church against the liquor
trafiic — thirsting for its destruction, and killing it.
Why is this ?

CHAPTER
THE

CATHOLIC

XXII.
CHURCH.

Important Factor, Seven Million American Adherents — American
Catholic Total Abstinence Union — Leo XIII. ''s Letter to Bishop
Ireland, 1887 — Baltimore Comicil ; Cardinal Gibbons — Murray's
"Catechism of Intem]Derance " — Catholic Total Abstinence Union
Established 1872 — Father Cleary at the Philadelphia Tempei'ance
Centennial — Powderly , Archbishop Ryan, Bishop Ireland ; Father
Mathew, Cardinal Manning, and Father Nugent — Catholic Temperance Magazine 1887 : "The Loss of our Children" — Catholics in
Labor Organizations — Father Conaty's Two Addresses — "Total
Abstinence Organized on Catholic Principles " — The Catholic Church
and her followers will eventually demand Prohibition.

I DEVOTE all the space possible to this sketch of the
Catholic Church, because of the great population in our
own and in other countries who are embraced within its influence ;nor do I think the advanced ground it now occupies
as a temperance body is generally understood. I may be
pardoned for adding that I also cherish the hope that more
knowledge will lessen prejudice, promote harmony, and lead
to co-operative action among religious bodies, against an evil
which threatens all.
The Christian population of the world is thus stated by
Mr. Spofford, in the American Almanac for 1886 — it being
an estimate from Schem's statistics of the world :
Roman Catholics,
Protestants,
Eastern Churches,

201,000,000
106,000,000
81,000,000

Total,

388,000,000

There are in the United States 7,000,000 adherents of th
Catholic faith (as stated in the Catholic Directory, 1883),
out of a total population of about 60,000,000. The temperance movement is probably more important to the welfore
of the Catholic population of this country than to any other
equal number of our people ; 472
while the relation of the church

POPE

LEO

XIII. 'S LETTER.

473

to that movement, in the world at large, is one of the chief
factors which must determine the future of the race.
I have, therefore, felt peculiar anxiety, in the preparation
of this book, to secure authentic information and to state
fairly the Catholic position in this great struggle with the
foes of a common Christianity and civilization. Addressing
Cardinal Gibbons upon the subject, that eminent prelate and
most courteous gentleman referred my request to Rev. Father
Mahony of St. Paul, to whom I am under special obligation
for documents and references, from which much of this matter in regard to the Catholic Church is obtained.
The Pope is, in an important sense, the church ; or, as the
Gatliolic Temperance Magazine of May, 1887, expresses the
idea, " Without the approval of Eome and the blessing of
God's Vicar on earth, no Catholic cause can succeed. Every
Catholic knows this, and it is thus his first anxiety to secure,
in some form or other, the encouragement of the Holy Father
for every good work in which he is interested." From the
same number of the magazine, I take the following letter from
Pope Leo XIII., in which he expresses his approval of the
cause of temperance, and of the American Catholic Total
Abstinence Union, with a completeness and power Avhich
even from a layman of the church should exert a wide-spread
influence. I am sure that it must excite the gratitude and
admiration of ever}^ lover of the cause of temperance to
read this authoritative expression from the Pope in favor of
the temperance work. The letter is addressed to Bishop
Ireland, the Father ]Mathew of our time ; who, in securing
this important temperance paper alone, has rendered a
greater service to the cause than could have been rendered
by many a long life devoted to its promotion.
The following is a translation of the Pope's letter :
" To Our Venerable Brother John Ireland, Bishop of St. Paul, Minn.;
Leo Xni., Pope.
" Venerable Brother, Health and Apostolic Benediction.
"The admirable works of piety and charity by which our faithful childven in the United States labor to promote, not only their
own temporal and eternal welfare, but also that of their fellowcitizens, and which you have recently related to us, give to us
exceeding great consolation.
And, above all, we have rejoiced to

474

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

leani with what energy and zeal, by means of various excellent
associations, and especially through the Catholic Total Abstinence
Union, you combat the destructive vice of intemperance. For it
is well known to us how ruinous, how deplorable, is the injury,
both to faith and to morals, that is to be feared from intemperance
in drink. Nor can we sufficiently praise the prelates of the
United States, who recently, in the Plenary Council of Baltimore, with weightiest words, condemned this abuse ; declaring it
to be a perpetual incentive to sin, and a fruitful root of all evils,
plunging the families of the intemperate into direst ruin, and
drawing numberless souls down to everlasting perdition ; declaring, morever, that the faithful who yield to this vice of intemperance become thereby a scandal to non-Catholics, and a great hindrance to the propagation of the true religion.
" Hence, we esteem worthy of commendation the noble resolve
of our pious associations, by which they pledge themselves to
abstain totally from every kind of intoxicating drink. Nor can it
at all be doubted that this determination is the proper and the
truly efficacious remedy for this very great evil ; and that so much
the more strongly will all be induced to put this bridle upon appetite, by how much the greater are the dignity and influence of
those who give the example. But greatest of all in this matter
should be the zeal of priests, who, as they are called to instruct
the people in the word of life, and to mould them to Christian
morality, should also, and above all, walk before them in the practice of virtue. Let pastors, therefore, do their best to drive the
plague of intemperance from the fold of Christ, by assiduous
preaching and exhortation, and to shine before all as models of
abstinence, and so the many calamities with which this vice
threatens both church and State may, by their strenuous endeavors, be averted.
"And we most earnestly beseech Almighty God that, in this important matter. He may graciously favor your desires, direct your
counsels, and assist your endeavors ; and, as a pledge of the
divine protection and a testimony of our paternal affection, we
most lovingly bestow upon you, venerable brother, and upon all
your associates in this holy league, the Apostolic Benediction.
" Given at Rome, from St. Peter's, this 27th day of March, in the
year 1887, the tenth year of our pontificate.
"Leo Xm., Pope."
To show the energetic interest of those directly in charge
€f the Catholic polity in the United States, in the temperance reform, 1 quote from the declaration of the council of

THE

COUNCIL

OF

BALTIMORE.

475

Baltimore, the home of Cardinal Gibbons, and which may
be accepted as representing truly his views and policy at the
present time :
" Keep away from drinking-places Saturday nights, and carry
your wages home to your famiUes, where the wages rightfully
belong.
"The most shocking scandals we have to deplore spring from
mtemperance.
"We invoke a blessing on the cause of temperance and on
all who are laboring for its advancement in a true Christian
spirit.
" Let the exertions of Catholic temperance societies meet with
the hearty co-operation of pastor and people, and they will go far
towards strangling the monstrous evil of intemperance. Pastoral
Letter, Acta, p. xciii. The misuse of intoxicating drinks is certainly one of the most deplorable evils of our age and country.
Intemperance is a constant source of sin and a copious fountain
of misery. It has brought to utter ruin countless multitudes and
entire families, and has precipitated into eternal perdition very
many souls. All should, therefore, be exhorted, by the love of
Ood and country, to bend every energy to the extirpation of this
baleful evil. To the clergy, to whom God has given the office of
breaking unto men the Bread of Life and training them in Christian morality, we chiefly look for helpers in this great work. Let
them never cease to raise their voices against drunkenness and
the causes and occasions of it, especially in giving spiritual missions to the people.
" We approve as highly commendable, in our times, the practice of those who abstain entirely from the use of intoxicating
liquors. We also recognize as worthy of great praise the Catholic Total Abstinence Union and the confraternity of 'The Sacred
Thirst,' laboring as they are, by jDrayer and good works, for the
promotion of temperance, and relying as they do more on the
grace of God, the efficacy of prayer and the saci-aments, than on
the strength of the human will alone. We commend these associations, enjoying as they do the blessing of the Holy Father, to
the paternal care of the clergy, so that they may flourish more
and more, and always adhere to the truly Catholic methods they
now follow."
As

an illustration of the teachings of the church to

children, I quote from the " small catechism of intemperance," by Dr. John O'Kane Murray.

476

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

"What, in brief, is the effect of intemperance on the mind?
"Intemperance gradually ruins the mind. It damages the
whole nervous system. It is one of the chief causes of idiocy,
insanity, epilepsy, paralysis, sleeplessness, and other diseases of the
mind and nervous system.
" What is the effect of intemperance on the moral nature of man ?
"Intemperance destroys morality. It weakens Avill power.
Reason soon ceases to rule. Character vanishes. The abuse of
alcohol over-stimulates the feelings, emotions, and baser passions ;
and thus opens the door to vice, crime, and every kind of temj)tation. It leads to idleness, impurity, profanity, scandal, quarrelling, gambling, irreligion, blasphemy, murder, suicide, and other
crimes, nameless and numberless. It is stated that seven-tenths of
all the crimes committed in New York City in the year 1882
came from drinking, and about four-fifths of all crimes of
violence had their origin in intemperance.
" What terrible conclusions must be drawn from the foregoing
statement ?
" That so long as a man or a woman
tion of character is impossible.

is intemperate, reforma-

"Mention some of the evil effects of intemperance on the
human body ?
" Intemperance strikes at the very root of good health. It soon
gives the countenance a bloated, brutal aspect. It leads to
chronic diseases of the heart, stomach, liver, eyes, arteries, lungs,
bladder and kidneys. ' The nervous tissues,' says a late
scientific writer, ' are perhaps the first to suffer; and the shaking
hand and tottering gait are infallibly followed by a similar tottering of the intellectual and moral faculties. The stomach resents
the constant introduction of ardent spirits, and soon refuses
properly to digest food. The liver and kidneys give oiit in a
similar way, and the impairment of their functions causes
terrible dropsy. The heart gets fatty and weak, the lungs lose
their fresh elasticity, and soon there is not a tissue in the body
which has not, in one way or another, succumbed to the illtreatment to which it has been subjected.'
" Intemperance, then, must greatly shorten life ?
" Certainly it does. It brings death long before old age. The
habitual drinker must decay prematurely. This is a just and
solemn law, that cannot be repealed by any corrupt Legislature.
Often death comes with the awful rapidity of a lightning flash,
and the red nose and fiery face of the wretched toper disappear
forever from the busy scenes of this world. No man can live
drunk and live long.

James, Cardinal Gibboiis.
By permission rf Backrach Ss' Bro. , Baltimore.

THE

CATHOLIC

TOTAL

ABSTINENCE

UNION.

477

"What is the effect of intemperance on society?
"It has filled the world with misery and scandal. It arrests
the progress of religion and civilization. It fosters every kind of
immorality. The millions spent on liquors are lost. Sober
people are burdened with countless paupers and orphans. Twothirds of the poor children in asylums are the offspring of
drunken parents. The jails, almshouses, and ])enitentiaries are
chietiy filled by those who have fallen victims to intemperance.
The crime-stained wretch at the gallows commonly warns his
hearers that rum brought him to such an elevation ; and amongst
the countless woes of the world, there are few indeed that
can not be traced to intem])erance.
"What is the chief cure for intemperance and its awful effects?
" Total abstinence from all intoxicating drinks. The vast
majority of mankind can not use such drink in 'moderation.'
Even in the hands of the wise and strong, alcohol is a dangerous
instrument ; but in the hands of the weak and foolish, it is a
murderous, two-edged weapon. The drunkard must be a failure
in this world ; and, according to St. Paul, he has little to hope in
the next."
The Catholic Total Abstinence

Union

of America

was

established in 1872 by delegates fi'oni the various total
abstinence societies and State unions assembled in Baltimore. One of their resolutions was as follows ;
" Jiesolved, That this convention, though not deeming it expedient to take part in any political or legislative action in reference to
prohibitory liquor laws, recognizes, however, the great good that
would accrue from the suppression of public drinking-places, and
from such legislation as would restrain the manufacture of intoxicating liquors within bounds consistent with public morality, and
will gladly hail such legislation whenever the proper authorities
may grant it."
The caution exercised in avoiding open political demonstration would hardly permit the Union to go further in
approval of prohibitory laws at that time — nor indeed is
there occasion to do so, since this is sufficiently emphatic,
and whatever is lacking in this resolution — if anything —
is more than supplied by the Pope's letter cited at the
beginning of this chapter. Not that bis letter refers to
political action any more than do the general teachings of the
Christian religion — but it is evident that no Catholic, after

478

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

reading this strong letter from the head of his church, can
doubt that the cause of temperance, and its promotion by
every form of action, now has that " approval of Rome and
blessing of God's Vicar upon earth " without which " no
Catholic cause can succeed." Of late the Union has increased in zeal and numbers with astonish-ing rapidity,
and, by the aid of an active literary propaganda, a
Catholic temperance literature, in the form of books and
pamphlets, etc., is being created, and the church press is
devotins: much attention to the cause. Father Elliott has
written a memorial, which was revised by Bishop Ireland,
and laid before the Council of Baltimore, which is said, "for
vigorous language and plain presentation of the evils of
liquor-selling, never to have been surpassed in the literar3r
annals of America."
I have already quoted from the declaration of the council
and the fiill letter of the Pope.
Father Cleary was a delegate from the C. T. A. Union of
America to the Centennial Temperance Conference held at
Philadelphia, September, 1885. In his address to the conference he stated :
" Our Catholic Total Abstinence Union of America comprises
over 40,000 pledged total abstainers, and, of these 40,000, I think
I am within the lines when I say that at least 39,999 are sworn
enemies of alcohol until they go down to their graves
The object we have in -v^ew is to make our people the sworn enemies of alcohol. We believe in supporting every just measure
that may be brought about by statutory enactment for the assistance of our cause
And we believe that as long as the
saloon dares with brazen effrontery to demoi'alize our politics,
that the church, with uprightness, with a clear and serene countenance, should enter the political arena to purify it." — ("One
Hundred Years Temperance," pp. 54, 55.)
From the current press I gather the following : At the
last (the seventeenth) annual meeting of the C. T. A. Union,
held in Philadelphia, Mr. Powderly was present and made
able speeches. Archbishop Ryan of Philadelphia gave the
cause of temperance hearty indorsement by administering
the communion and by a very pointed speech in the Academy
of Music.
Father Cleary, now president of the Union,.

BISHOP Ireland's speeches.

479

made the leading speech of the occasion, and, among
things, said :

other

" There never was a time in the history of our country when
it was more important that our Catholic people make no mistake
in the discussion of the great social problem agitating the public
mind. The rights and proper privileges of the honest laboring
man are in danger, more, however, from the intrigues of the
liquor-seller than from the encroachments of capital. It is a well
recognized fact that the wide-spread evil of patronizing the saloon
has much to do with delaying a settlement of the labor difficulties,
as also of multiplying their number. If the giant curse of drink
were removed, the way would be easy and plain to a solution of
the labor problem. It is not surprising, therefore, that the leader
of the laboring men declares he would prefer a following of 100,000 total abstainers to 12,000,000 moderate drinkers, patrons of
the liquor saloon. The laboring man will never secure the rights
and privileges due to honest labor so long as the saloon receives
a large share of his earnings. The most prudent economy can
suggest no more reliable safeguard against foolish and sinful extravagance than a total abstinence society. It is the most practical kind of an anti-poverty society. "
Bishop Ireland has delivered many of the most powerful
speeches for the cause of temperance ever spoken by man.
1 can find space for but a part of his address in St. Paul
Cathedral, August 2, 1882 :
'■'■Internperance, an evil most heinous before God, most dreadful
in its results^ has grown among us to gigantic proportions. Into
countless homes it shoots its venom-laden fangs, and annually,
aye daily, it gathers into its deadly coils v:hole hecatombs of victims. Its presence is felt through the entire land, and everywhere
it revels with demoniac nature in sin and misery.
"Intemperance, of course, is not of recent date in the world.
The frequency and virulence, however, of the evil, which alarms
us so much to-day, are traits peculiar to our own times. The
populations of the northern countries of Euroj^e and of America
in a special manner suffer from its ravages. A most unnatural
thirst for alcohol, as the intoxicating fluid is called, devours
them
" The thesis is maintained by most able physicians that alcohol
is no food, producing neither heat nor strength / that it is no
stinndant, increasing the healthy activity of any organ of the body,
although it may allow of a disorderly action

480

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

" In the United States, the cost of alcoholic liquors to the consumers, in one year, has been ^760,000,000, or an average of over
$\b to every man, woman and child in the country. In Great
Britain, the cost in one year has been £142,000,000, or $710,000,000
— an average of over |20 to every person of the population. It
is difficult for the mind, without some terms of comj^arison, to
comprehend these figures. The sum spent in four years for alcoholic drinks in Great Britain would purchase all the railroads in
the country ; and tlie sum spent in six years would payoff the
national debt. The aggregate of wages paid by all the manufacturing establishments in America during the year 1869 was only
$775,584,000 — a sum but slightly in excess of the drink-bill for
the same year. The total value of all church property in the
country in 1870 was $354,483,000. Six months' abstinence from
drink would buy it out
" But what of the efficacy of total abstinence as a remedy for
the prevailing intemperance ? The tens of thousands whom you
lead to the practice of total abstinence are saved. A totcd-abstinence society is the harbor : withiii, the loinds are still, the sea is
calm / outside, the billoios roar, and the rocks and shoals lie in
wait. Outside the harbor many escape shipwreck ; but many too
sink low and deep. All who are within have reason to rejoice.
In the name of their most precious interests, invite those who are
without to enter with you. They have perhaps already suffered
from the storm, or, maybe, they are as yet unscathed. In either
case, far better for them the harbor. The circumstances of the
present time, we must ever remember, are peculiar. Society is
honeycombed M'ith temptations to drink ; the stoutest and bravest
are daily falling victims. Who, you can ask, is sure in advance
of victory? To Irishmen particularly, because of their comparative native powerlessness to resist alcohol, because of the fatal
habits in which past traditions have wrapped them, because their
welfare is near to my heart, I will never cease pointing out, roith
an undeviating finger, the harbor of peace and of security — total
abstinence. Believe not that it is a difficult task to lead men to
total abstinence. Your records tell a different story. Counting
all Catholic total-abstinence societies in America, whether coivnected with the Union or not, we have 100,000 total abstainers.
Is this a small number, when we know that not very earnest, persistent effort has been made so far ? Remember the magnificent
success of Father Mathew ! See what Cardinal Manning and
Father Nugent have done in England ! . . . .
" To the priests of the church who labor to further the cause of
total abstinence, I offer in a special manner my congratulations

THE

CATHOLIC

TEMPERANCE

MAGAZINE.

481

and my thanks. With them pre-eminently vests tlie future of
their people.
Their earnest co-operation is all tliat is needed to
insure the success of the total-abstinence movement
"May Heaven, my brethren, pour down its richest blessing
upon your Union, and continuously add to its peaceful and glorious
triumphs."
The destructive effect of interapemnce upon moral conduct
and religious faith is quite as apparent among Protestants as
it is shown to be by the following matter, taken from the
Catholic Temperance Magazine of February, 1887, in the
Catholic Church.
This ]\Ioloch lives on children. It would be far better to
throw them into the Thames, the Hudson and the Mississippi.
The heathen mother needs no advice from sanctimonious,
mercenary, drunken nations who give their own
the fire.

children to

If Christianity were no better than Christian nations, our
missionaries Avould deserve to be mobbed out of every pagan
countr}'. It is strange — miraculous — that they have accomplished so much, while national policy and the practices of
trade have given the continual lie to the precepts of our holy
religion.
The extract referred to follows :
" THE

LOSS

OF

OUR

CHILDRKN.

" It is a hopeful sign that Catholics in general are at last realizing
what has been j)lain enough to some of us for a long time. The
fact that our losses, from one cause or another, more thnn counterbalance our gains, and that our progress and prosperity for the
last few years have been material rather than spiritual, has been put
before the Catholic public, with moi-e or less clearness, by more
than one writer
And, now that the Bishop of Salford
has brought the matter prominently forward in the most recent
and not less important of his penny books, 'The Loss of Our
Children' (which we hope each of our reaclei-s will obtain and
study), the laity are w^aking up
Here is his lordship's
summary :
"An analysis of the condition of the children under twenty-ono
years of age brings us to the following appalling conclusions, viz.:
"That there are in extreme danger of loss of faith, or practically lost to the faith, 5420 ; viz. :
31

482

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Under 7,
Under 16,
Under 21,

2381
. 2130
909

Total,

5420

" In this category are classed those children whose parents were
never at Mass, never made their Easter duties, and who were utterly
callous of the religious welfare of their children ; who, in their
turn, never attended Mass or attended Catholic school.
" In great danger, 2341 ; viz. :
Under 7
Under 1(5
Under 21,

1208
819
314

Total,

2341

"In danger, 1912 ; viz. :
Under 7
Under l(i,
Under 21,

885
' . . . .

Total,
" This unhappy residuum is thus apportioned :
To irreligious parents,
To mixed marriages,
To careless and indifferent parents
Total,

744
283
1912

5738
2584
1351
9673

" This result, be it remeynhered, is for a part only of one
diocese.
" What are the causes of this loss ? The Bishop of Salford gives
many, but one demands our special attention : The drinking habits ofparents, producing thriftlessness, poverty, religious indifference, and a general degradation of mind and body, in lohich the
children participate. This cause is, indeed, only too obvious.
What are we doing to lessen it? It is more than ten years since
Cardinal Manning said : ' If we had besfun the Leaccue of the Cross
twenty-five years ago, we should have a hundred thousand more
Catholics in London. If twenty-five years ago men and women
had been sober, there would have been that number of Catholics
more to-day than there is.'
" There are thousands of the sons and daughters of Irish parents
in the work-house. How did they get there? By drink. They
went into the work-house to get bread, and their children were
brought up without faith and without religion.

THE

CATHOLIC

WORLD.

483

"And yet, so far as well-to-do Catholics are concerned, the
Catholic temperance movement is practically ignored, if, indeed, it
is not actually and openly despised ; while even among those who
abstain themselves, there is far too little zeal for the welfare of
others."
The adherents of the Catholic Church are largely those
who are personally connected with the labor organizations of
the day, and to no class of our people is the temperance
question more vital than to them. While I do not consider
total abstinence a complete remedy, it is the largest directly
avaihible measure of relief for the ills of poverty and the
misfortunes of life. It is a means of evolution which we can
ourselves apply to better our condition ; and we shall have a
stronger claim to help from others when wc have, to the
utmost of our ability, helped ourselves. Other classes of
men should, however, be slow to demand of the poor a
higher standard of moral action or of self-restraint than they
impose upon themselves : and least of all should they make
the cheap indulgences of the manual toiler, which are often
only the opiates which temporarily relieve physical or mental distress, the excuse for permitting the continuance of
social and legal disabilities which humanit}' should remove.
Rev. Thomas J. Conaty, president of the Catholic Total
Abstinence Union of America, has recently published two
very able addresses upon the relation of the liquor problem
to that of laiior, very brief extracts from which I reproduce
from the Caihol'w World.
In the issue of the Catholic World of May, 1887, is the
first address, in which he says : " Who support the saloons?
Certainly not the wealthy classes ; they seldom enter any
establishment that may be called by that name. In one of
our factory cities in Massachusetts, with 15,000 operatives,
there are 375 saloons, or one in every forty. That is to
sa}', forty working people are supposed to support a saloon.
When you consider that out of those 15,000 operatives
there must be several thousands who never use liquor, you
can readily see how heavy this blood tax is upon the classes
that drink. And we can also see why so many are in misery and degradation, perfect strangers to happiness, contentment or independence, always paying rent, and always in

484

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

debt. Workingmen, open your eyes ! Protect your labor,
save your earnings. You are in a great contest for your
rights : you need clear heads ; you need manhood, which
teaches to make the most of" every day, which enables you
to earn and to enjoy. Labor is the badge of manhood.
Lal)or is the noblest title in America. It is the key to
American success. Intemperance has already swept out of
life more than war and famine have destroyed. Its scythe
is still deep in the harvest. Men are falling beneath it. Be
men. Break off every chain of slavery. Protect your labor
from the tyranny of drink. If you are going to be Knights
of Labor and struggle for your rights, be also knights of temperance. Preserve the powers given by God to enable you
to labor and to earn, and, when you have earned, to purchase
happiness, comfort and independence, and not misery, misfortune and slavery, for these are the fruits of intemperance.
Labor has too noble a mission to be allowed to become a
handmaid of intemperance."
Pursuing the same subject in the CatJiolic World of
August, 1887, Father Conaty says: "The battle is really
between the saloon and the home. The saloon has fastened
itself upon society as an ulcer living upon the life-blood of
the people. The saloon, building itself upon the ruin of
broken lives and shattered homes, spreads desolation everywhere, respecting no class or sex. The union recalls the
countless boys ruined, the fathers changed into destro_yers
of their little ones, the industry paralyzed, the prisons filled,
and it asks each saloon how much of this is its work. It
calls on the law to place about the saloon such reasonable
restrictions as will remove as far as possible the evils that
spring up from it. It demands the enforcement of those
laws for the protection of home. The arrogance of the
saloon and the power it wields in political affairs, all for its
own interests and against those of society, have awakened a
stronger interest in the cause of total abstinence organized
on Catholic principles."
With these citations I close the chapter. Such high
authority and eloquent utterances must move not only those
to whom they are specially addressed, but the whole bodypolitic.
Experience
will demonstrate
the necessity of

THE

CATHOLIC

CHURCH.

485

adopting fully the plan, not only of total abstinence by
the individual, but also of absolute prohibition by the State.
May we not hope — I feel sure that it is coming — that the
might}' power of the Catholic Church, with her followers,
will demand it in the nation as well as in every commonwealth Avherein her influence can be exerted. It will be the
easier to abstain from that which does not exist ; no one is
tempted by that which he cannot get. Every lover of his
country, and of his fellow-men, will thank God Avhen the
whole Christian Church shall demand that the law require of
society what conscience and religion demand of the individual— total abstinence from all beverages which intoxicate
and destroy.

CHAPTER
TEMPERANCE

XXIII.

ORGANIZATIONS.

The National Temperance Society and Publication House ; Agitation
and Literature; "Total Abstinence and Prohibition"; William E.
Dodge and Theodore Cuyler; the Temperance Advocate — Independent Order of Good Templars ; Five Million Members ; an Organization which Belts the Globe ; Six Hundred Thousand Meetings a Year ;
the Ritual in a Dozen Languages ; the Lamented Hon. John B. Finch
— The Sons of Temperance ; the Oldest Secret Temperance Societj'',
Organized 1842 ; Gen. Sam. Gary : " Seal up the Fountain of Death " ;
Growth in Southern States ; Eugene H. Clapp, " Responsibility of the
Individual for Inebriety " — Templars of Honor and Temperance —
Citizens' Law and Order League of the United States ; the Object to
Enforce Existing Laws; Charles C. Bonney, President; Platform of
Convention, 1885 — Royal Templars of Temperance — Cadets of
Temperance — United Temperance Association — United Kingdom
Alliance — British Temperance League — Scottish Temperance League
— Irish Temperance League — Political Parties and the Reform —
Through Pai'ties or Above Parties, the People Should Extirpate the
Evil from the Land.

THE great work of temperance education — moral suasion
and legal reform — is largely promoted by various voluntary associations created for that purpose, of which the
principal are the National Temperance Society and Publication House, the Independent Order of Good Templars, the
Sons of Temperance, Templars of Honor and Temperance,
the Citizens' Law and Order League, and the Woman's
Christian Temperance Union. There are other organizations
of importance which deserve mention, that -mj limits will
not permit. But this work would be incomplete without
some account of what may be styled the secular wing of the
Army of the Lord.
THE

NATIONAL

TEMPERANCE
SOCIETY
HOUSE.

AND

PUBLICATION

This society is the creator of modern temperance literature. Itwas organized at Saratoga in the year 1865, by 325
4SG

THE

NATIONAL

TEMPERANCE

SOCIETT.

487

delegates, gathered from twenty-five different States. Committees were chosen, the one to conduct the general work of
temperance agitation and reform, the other to produce a literature— books, pamphlets, tracts, newspapers — for distribution among the people. The exceeding ignorance of the
country and of the world upon the subject, twenty years
ago, would hardly be credited now. It can not be said that
the ignorance is even yet dispelled — it is less dense. Some
are cured and have gone about their business ; a few are running, leaping and praising God, which is being a "crank"; a
larsfe number see men as trees walkinsr ; some have gflass
eyes, and look well, but are stone-blind, and some are l)lind
beyond pretense of hope or even of miracle ; and many fear
the light because their deeds are evil — their eyes are good,
but they keep them shut.
The committees, after much dclil)eration, were consolidated. Hon. William E. Dodge of New York city was
made the first president, and the committee had its place of
meeting in his office. The constitution was drawn l)y Rev.
Dr. Theodore L. Cuyler, now the president of the society,
and for all these years a tower of strength to the cause.
Others have died, but he has not. How many thank God
that he " still lives " !
" The basis of the society is total abstinence for the individual and total prohibition for the State." The pledge
is as follows :
" No person shall be a member of this society who does not subscribe to tlie following pledge — namely :
" ' We, the undersigned, do agree tliat we will not use intoxicating liquors as a beverage, nor traffic in them ; that we will not
provide them as an article of entertainment, or for persons in our
employment; and that in all suitable ways we will discountenance
their use throughout the country.' "
The receipts of the society have been about $1,100,000,
" every dollar of which has been expended in creating and
circulating a sound temperance literature, and carrying on its
missionary operations
Its work covers the nation,
and its literature permeates every part of the country
It furnishes physiological investigation, social appeal, religious instruction, political argument, scientific experiment.

488

THE

TEMPEKANCE

MOVEMENT.

legislative discussion, Bible truth, pulpit preparation, platform oratory, drawing-room readings, lyceum and lodge
exhortations, and, in short, supplies for every rank in life
and every condition in society." The society has now on its
catalogue more than 1600 publications, from the pens of
more than 250 dift'erent writers, covering every conceivable
aspect of the temperance discussion. It publishes the
National Temperance Advocate, now twenty-two years old,
of which, up to May, 1885, more than 2,000,000 copies
had been published. One-third of its publications are for
children. About 30,000,000 copies of the Youth's Temperance Banner have been distributed already. It has printed
more than 100,000,000 pages of temperance Sabbatli-school
matter, and 4,000,000 pages of children's tracts. Of various
temperance tracts 90,000,000 pages and tons of music-books
and books of temperance songs, and 711,417,427 pages of
temperance matter printed since the organization of the
society.
The missionary work of the society comprises :
1. The work among the freedmen of the South, sending
missionaries and literature, etc.
2. The work in Congress for national commission of
inquiry into the results of the liquor traffic, Constitutional
prohibition, and other legislation concerning the temperance
reform.
3. Holding mass meetings, conferences, conventions, etc.,
in all parts of the country.
4. The introduction of temperance text-books into the
public schools.
5. To scatter a literature in prisons, hospitals, shops
and jails, and other needy localities.
6. To send a specially prepared volume upon the various
phases of the temperance question, to the pastor of every
colored church in the South.
All this has been prosecuted upon a gigantic scale, almost
without money and without price. This society has made
temperance salvation about as free as any. Its managers
have passed through the valley of the shadow of death, in
the dark and bitter years of the past, in order to continue
their great and sacred work.
Of all this there is a full

THE

GOOD

TEMPLAES.

489

account in "One Hundred Years of Temperance." Those
who sometimes sneer that the statue of Mr. Dodge stands in
the city of New York, should know more of the work done
by himself and his associates. If they realized the benefactions which he was instrumental in conferring upon mankind,
such men would kiss the ground at the foot of his monument
in humble apology — if they did their duty. It is a great
shame that this institution, which has been the great instrumentality ofthem all in producing and shaping the mighty
temperance movement of to-day, and is all-important for the
future, should ever suffer from Avant — like one of God's
poor.
In all these years — for many I have known it of him myself— Mr. J. N. Stearns, the able and indefatigable corresponding secretary and publishing agent, often under the
utmost stress of difficulties, has worn out body and soul to
promote the great cause and to hasten the day of sunrise
upon a drunken world. If I could pay him a suitahlc tril)ute
in this book, I would do it. But God knows his jewels, and
that is enough.
Mr. A. M. Powell has long been connected with the
society, and the Temperance Advocate is his sufficient monument. His literary work has been of the tirst order, and
his clear and viirorous
been devoted to leofiso mind has longo
O
lative measures of both State and nation.
The true friends of temperance should strengthen and
support the National Temperance Society, and uphold the
hands of these two men who have charge of its practical
work, as one of their first duties to the cause.
In the thick-comins: events of the future this great arsenal
should be kept full. The army has need of abundant stores,
and means for their distribution.
THE INDEPENDENT

ORDER

OF GOOD

TEMPLARS.

The thirty-third annual session of this order was held at
Saratoga in June, 1887, with 161 representatives and post
representatives from 46 Grand Lodges. The order has
483,103 members and 139,951 Juvenile Templars, and is by
far the largest temperance organization in the world. It has
initiated over five millions of members.
The order exists in

490

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

every State and Territory of the United States ; in all the
provinces in Canada ; in England, Scotland, Ireland, and
Wales ; in Belgium, Denmark, Sweden, Germany, Holland,
Iceland, Switzerland, and all other localities in Europe ; in
Arabia, China, India, and other countries in Asia ; in Capo
Colony, Egypt, Gold Coast, Natal, St. Helena, Sierra Leone,
and other localities in Africa ; throughout the West Indies
and South America ; and in Australia, New South Wales,
New Zealand, and wheresoever else civilization and rum, its
natural foe, are to be found. The peaceful influence of this
great order is as widespread as the sunshine ; and its prayers
and songs, and the incense of its good works, ascend everywhere under the whole heaven.
It is simply a temperance society doing business under the
laws of God everywhere throughout the world, with an eye
single to one great underlying principle, total abstinence for
the individual and total prohibition for the State. The
pledge is perpetual. The order is inflexibly opposed to license
laws and to any form of legal recognition of the liquor trafiic.
Over 12,000 meetings throughout the world are held each
week, in connection with the order ; over 600,000 each year,
and besides these thousands more of public meetings. Its
annual expenditures for the temperance cause far exceed
those of any other temperance organization, and are nearly
or quite $600,000. In this order a woman is as good as a
man. She can do or be anything for which she has capacity,
and it is not necessary that she be far superior to man so
that she may receive the same recognition. She has frequently held the highest offices in Grand Lodges. She votes
just like a man — yet the order grows constantly in widespread influence and beneficent power. Experience in this
great international republic seems to demonstrate that woman
is woman just as man is man ; that both constitute the human
race, which is a unit, and that the soul is of no sex. " The
Good Templars are essentially a religious organization,
although there is no religious test for membership, any
further than that no one who does not believe in a Supreme
Being can belong to the order."
" The ritual of the order has been translated into some ten
or twelve difierent languages," and "in all parts of the world

Mrs, Estlier

T. Hous/i,

of Vennont.

THE

GOOD

TEMPLARS.

491

the same ritual is in use, the same songs are sung ; the members of the order everywhere enter their lodge-rooms with
the same pass-word, the pass-word being changed all over
the world every three months. A Good Templar would be
just as much at ease in a lodge-room in China, in Africa, or
New Zealand, as he 'would at his own home."
The order was founded by a few earnest young men —
some of them reformed, in central New York during the year
1851. The following is the general platform or statement
of principles :
1. Total abstinence from all intoxicating liquors as a
beverage.
2. No license in any form or under any circumstances for
the sale of such liquors to be used as a beverage.
3. The absolute prohibition of the manufacture, importation and sale of intoxicating liquors for such purposes ;
prohibition by the will of the people, expressed in due form of
law, with the penalties deserved for a crime of such enormity.
4. The creation of a healthy public opinion upon the subject by the active dissemination of truth in all the modes
known to an enlightened philanthropy.
5. The election of good honest men to administer the laws.
6. Persistence in efforts to save individuals and communities from so direful a scourge against all forms of opposition
and difficulty, until our success is complete and universal.
I must refer the reader to the centennial volume, " One Hundred Years of Temperance," addresses by lion. S. D.Hastings,
Geo. A. Bailey, Esq., and other leading members of the order,
to whom I am indebted, for more complete information.
It is impossible to estimate the good accomplished by
Good Templars already, not alone in temperance reform and
in teaching by example the great lesson of the equality of
woman Avith man, but also in foreshadowing by the universality of its organization, its w^ork and its sympathies, the
new order of things when ;
" i\Ian to man, the Avarld o'er,
Shall brothers be for a' that."

It is with grief that, in closing this imperfect notice of one
of the principal agencies in past and future conflicts between

492

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

man and alcohol, I must record the great blow which it has
suffered, in common with the whole temperance movement,
by the startling death of the Chief Officer of the Order for
the world, Hon. John B. Finch of Illinois. In the presence
of such an event, the voice is mute and the pen will not
move.
God rest his soul, while millions bless his memory !
THE

SONS

OF

TEMPERANCE.

This is the oldest of the important secret temperance organizations, and was established to remedy the great imperfection in the Washingtonian movement, which sought and found
but unfortunately saved only a fraction of that which was
lost. Of the 600,000 inebriates reformed by the Washingtonian movement, 450,000 fell, never to rise again. It was
a gale Avhich blew from heaven briefly across the faces of the
sick nations ; many revived and a few recovered. But soon
the windows closed ; and poisoned air from the servers, and
distilleries reeking with disease and death, filled the hospitals of mankind, and hell and the grave were again merry
over their own.
There was no organization — there was no law. Enthusiasm, from its very nature, can not stay. An explosion may,
after a while, be repeated, but it is a poor organizer. It can
not Avait, and, without waiting, it can not save. All the
same, the explosion is good ; it rends the rock and is indispensable. To have created the necessity and to have made the
way for such an order as the Sons of Temperance, was, of
itself, an incalculable good ; and the one hundred and fifty
thousand who were steadfost have been a mighty power in
subsequent reform. Rev. R. Alder Temple, Most Worthy
Scribe, says : " A society was therefore needed Avhich should
offer a refuge to reformed men, and shield them from temptation
another conspicuous necessity had its influence
in originating the new order. A large proportion of the inebriates had emerged from the deepest poverty, and must
begin life anew. It was requisite that they should be furnished with the means of support in time of sickness. The
popular beneficial societies of the day were accessible ; but
none of these required total abstinence as a condition of
membership, nor could their benefits be made available by

THE

SONS

OF

TEMPERANCE.

493

the reformed, without serious peril. A society was therefore
needed which would offer its benetits and highest distinctions,
without prejudice, to the humblest as well as the loftiest, and
apply the balm of healing to the wounds inflicted by ignorance, improvidence and intemperance."
Therefore were the Sons of Temperance organized on the
twenty-ninth day of September, 1842, the object being thus
declared upon the official records of the society : " To j^hield
its members from the evils of intemperance ; to afford mutual
assistance in case of sickness, and to elevate their characters as
men." Althouoh its meetings are private, it disclaims being:
an oath-bound society, "unless the simple repetition of the
l^ledge be an oath." "The progress of the order during its
first decade was a triumphal march." " At the close of 1846,
the membership numbered 100,000 ; an increase of GO, 000
in one year."
In 1849, Gen. Gary, the chief officer, said : " AVe must
have a nobler, higher, holier ambition than to reform one
generation of drunkards after another. We nuist seal up
the fountain whence flows the desolating stream of death ! "
And the National Division declared that " the miftftion of the
order is to secure the utter annihilation of the manufacture
of and traffic in intoxicating drinks," and that " we desire,
will have and will enforce hnvs, in our respective localities,
for the suppression of this man-destroying, God-dishonoring
business," and that has been the policy and aim of the onler
until the present time. In 1850 the order had a membership
of 230,000, and was in the zenith of its power.
In 1866, all distinctions between man and woman, so far
as relates to membership and advancement, were al)olished,
" and woman took her seat beside the lord of creation as his
equal and complement, like ' perfect music set to noble
words.' " During the war, " wide-spread parahsis settled
upon the order. Disintegration stared it in the face," and,
aside from the influence of the war, general apathy and reaction existed in the temperance movement. This might
have been foretold, because in accordance with the laws of
human nature. In just the same way, the general interest
and zeal in the movement now manifest all over the country,
and its benefits, will disappear in reaction, unless they are

494

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

secured and locked up in the granaries of State and especially of national law. The seven years of famine will surely
come, when we shall starve, unless we save the corn raised
in these years of enthusiastic production.
During the third decade the order nearly disappeared from
the Southern States, but as soon as the war was over it began
to revive, and in 1872 it numbered nearly 94,000 members.
Various other organizations have arisen which have divided
with the " Sons " their peculiar work, and, although they do
not exhibit the growth of former years, and, in fact, declined
greatly in numbers for a while, there is no decrease in
their real vitality nor in the cause to which they are
devoted. The membership in 1882 was 73,000, a gain in
the three preceding years of 33,200 members; and at
the forty-third annual session of the JSTational Division,
held in Boston, July, 1887, the membership was reported
to be 84,379.
The Most Worthy Patriarch, Eugene H. Clapp of Boston,
in his report to the Division, took a position Avhich has been
advocated in this book — and which I believe to be indispensable to the success of the temperance reform — that of the
responsibility of the individual for inebriety, as well as for
any other offense which injures society. When the individual ceases to be responsible for his conduct he should be
confined.
Mr. Clapp says :
" For some time past there has been growing in my mind a
conviction that, in one phase at least of this temperance reformation, we have been making a grave mistake during the past. In
my experience as a manufacturer, employing large numbers of
men, I have noted personally (and my attention has been called to
it by other large employers) the increasing tendency to drunkenness among a certain class of our population. The remedy has
been sought in different directions, and to-day this remedy is
being applied much more strictly than ever before, and the feeling
is very strongly marked to discharge from one's employment the
man who allows himself to become a drunkard. Now, I know
that the whole tendency has been in the past to devote a large
amount of sympathy to the man who drinks, and a still larger
amount of reprobation for the man who furnishes the drink.
While I would not abate one jot or tittle of the denunciation of
the drunkard-maker, yet I believe that the time has come that we

Jarnes H. Roberts,
Chairman

Prohibitory

Com77iittce of Massachusetts.

THE

SONS

OF

TEMPERANCE.

495

ought, for our own protection at least, to equally denounce the
drani-clrinker. I believe much of the sympathy which has been
devoted in this way in the past has been wrongly placed, and
much of the consequences of evil habits of the drinking portion of
our community, for the sympathy has thus been expressed for
the man who drinks. We have been accustomed to say that the
drinker is a poor unfortunate and needs all our sympathies, and
who is to be aided and upheld, and we are taught to regard him
as a victim rather than a sinner. The time has come, in my
judgment, when we should teach that the sin of drunkenness is
just as vile and degrading as any other vice to which mankind is
addicted ; and as we hold the violator of law responsible in every
other direction, so we should hold equally the man who drinks for
the responsibility of his acts. While we teach him, as we have
in many cases, tiiat he is not responsible for the acts he does or
crimes he coniniits, we are simj)ly leading him into ways of false
security and rendering it so much easier for him to drink and so
much harder for him to stop. Let us, then, hold the drinker up
in the full measure of liis resi)onsibility in the acts he commits,
and let us no longer waste any false sympathy upon him unless he
is in a ])()sition to deserve it. Raise to-day a new standard of
reform, and say tlint the drunkard deserves nothing at our hands,
unless he recognizes the evils of tlie ])ast and is willing to do
something himself to aid in the bettering of his life. Without
this we can hope for nothing pei'manent in his future in this
direction. And I desire to call your attention to-day to the
thought that, if we are to make men sober, it is not by wasting our
energies by telling them they can not help themselves, but by
telling them unless they do help themselves it is impossible for us
to aid them. I have found, as a result of inquiry and personal
attention to this matter, that when men are taught that as a
result of their drinking habits they will be punished, either by
loss of situation or by legal methods, it becomes a strong element
of control over them, holding them more nearly in the line of duty.
I know, undoubtedly, T shall be classed as one having no sympathy
for the man whodriid<s; but I believe that the position I have
given you is the jiroper one, and the sooner we recognize the
responsibility of the driidcer, to himself and society, the sooner we
sliall begin to do something to stay this mighty flood of intemjierance which has swept over the land for so many years. I
would, then, liold the inebriate to a strict account for his acts, and
I believe that, in view of such an accounting, we shall find a better sentiment, a stronger desire to do better, and a general lessening of the evils which afflict the community."

496

THE

TEMPEEANCE

MOVEMENT.

This is all gospel truth ; but the primary duty is upon
society to outlaw the traffic and cleanse itself of the crime
by State, national and international law. Society manufactures, society sells, society distributes, society creates and
supplies the appetite; and, then, as to the individual — let
him o-o hano". And as to the individual, that is all rio'ht.
In no other way can public order be preserved. But it is
society which commits the greatest of all crimes, and upon
society at large justly fall the awful penalties.
TEMPLARS

or

HONOR

AND

TEMPERANCE.

This order seems to be the very poetry of secret organization applied to temperance. Rev. C. S. Woodruff, Most
Worthy Templar, says :
" The Temple of Honor is a child of Providence, boi-n at a time
when tliere was a lagging in the great temperance reformation, and
a lack of something was unmistakably felt ; it came into existence,
not only to help the inebriate in his desire to reform, but to confirm and establish him in his honest endeavors, — to throw around
him strong arms of fraternal lielp and sympathy, to educate him
in pm'er principles of life and character; and, more than all this,
to inaugurate those great educational forces which should make
the individual an abstainer, and the State a protector and hence
a prohibitor."
The Sons of Temperance, as we have seen, were conservative and simple in their organization, well adapted to their
great purpose of giving permanent rescue to the reformed.
Their order was the common school of reformation while the
Templars of Honor and Temperance sought to develop a higher,
broader, but at the same time more select culture, which they
clothed in an elaborate and highly refined symbolism.
The name Temple of Honor is the embodiment of the great
principles which underlie this order.
A most interesting account of it is given by Mr. Woodruff in "One Hundred Years of Temperance," p. 505.
THE

citizens'

LAW

AND

ORDER
LEAGUE
STATES.

OF

THE

UNITED

The object of this organization is the enforcement of existing laws, particularly those in restriction of the liquor
• traffic.
Its general idea is that the public good requires the

THE

LAW

AND ORDER

LEAGUE.

497

enforcement of whatever is, for the time being, the law of
the land ; that the supremacy of the law should be demonstrated for the sake of example, and for the preservation of
that respect for the personified public will without which
anarchy must usurp the place of government and destroy
the very cement of society. It demands only obedience to
the laws. The Law and Order movement orijjinated in
Chicago, in 1877 ; its operations were directed to the enforcement of the laws for the suppression of the sale of liquor to
minors.

Says Mr. Charles C. Bonney, President of the Na-

tional League : " Obstacles were encountered, but they were
speedily overcome, and soon the penalty of fine or imprisonment followed the complaint so swiftly that the then 3006
liquor saloons of Chicago practically surrendered, and have
ever since acknowledged the power of the Citizens' League.
It is believed that fully five-sixths of the sale of liquors to
minors has been effectually suppressed."
The National Law and Order League set forth its object
and principles at length in the annual convention of 1885.
The following extracts illustrate their spirit and the purpose
of the League.
1. "We believe it an admitted fact that drunkenness inflicts upon
the people of this country more misery, pauperism and crime
than all other causes combined
3. We have witnessed, in all sections of the country, the
humiliating fact that while the peo])le generally yield a cheerful
obedience to all laws enacted for the protection of society, the
dealers in intoxicating liquors have become confirmed in the
habit of disregarding and disobeying all laws enacted for the
restriction of their business, in the interest of good order, good
morals, and a higher and better prosperity for j^erson, family, state
and nation
G. We invite all good citizens, irrespective of religious faith, of
all political parties, witliout regard to their oj^inions upon questions of legislation, without respect to their views ujDon any other
question whatevei-, to unite with us, and to labor for the complete enforcement of all laws placing restrictions upon the
traffic in acoholic drinks
8. We

adopt as the motto of the organization these words,

"We ask only obedience to law"; and as our watchword, "Save
the boys " ; and upon the platform here indicated, and with these

498

THE

TEMPEEANCE

MOVEMENT.

inscriptions upon our banner, we go forth to battle, with full faith
that He who is the Author of all law will in the end crown our
efforts with complete victory,"
This organization supplies a new and greatly needed force
in the temperance reform, and, quietly but effectually, has
put vitality into the existing anti-iiquor laws in many parts
of the country, demonstrating the existence of a power for
good in the law itself, where a lax public sentiment or corrupt alliance between officials and the criminals whom they
sought to protect, in spite of its provisions, had brought a
disgrace upon the statute, which belonged to the community.
The organization is alert and efficient, although quiet in
its operations, and an increasing power.
THE

CHAUTAUQUA

LITERARY

AND

SCIENTIFIC

CIRCLE

is an immense educational system with ganglia or nerve-centers in many parts of the country, and rapidly spreading, and
likely to cover the whole of it, all connected with the parent
organization in such way as to secure the harmonious and
intelligent supervision necessary to efficiency.
The institution already has more than 60,000 members.
It is unique and remarkable although very simple in its conception and practical working, and is capable of universal
application to a great public want. It should become, and, I
believe, will become, one of the permanent institutions of the
country.
The Circle is filling the space between the common schools
and the higher institutions of learning with the omnipresence
and flexibility of water, rather than with the inadaptability
of a solid substance, giving to all the opportunity of home
reading study and culture under only so much of supervisory
help as is required for obtaining a thorough acquaintance
with all the great departments of popular knowledge. In
this way every spare moment of a whole life may be economized and invested in a constantly accumulating fund of
information and mental discipline.
The Circle is, in fact, becoming a great popular college,
and I believe it will be permanent and one of the most influential forces of the country.

mi

Rev. Theodore L. Flood, D.D.,
Editor of ^'Thc Chaiitatujuan.''

POLITICAL

PARTIES

AND

THE

REFORM.

499

Physiology and hygiene are necessarily included in its
course of reading and study, and the character of its membership leads to the special investigation of the relation of intemperance to health and the public welfare.
I anticipate that this new and growing institution of our
country will, directly and indirectly, exert a powerful influence in the coming struggles for temperance reform.
OTHER

ORGANIZATIONS.

There are other very excellent and important organizations of growing strength and corresponding usefulness in
thi:5 country, of which the principal are the Royal Templars
of Tem[)erance, which from the year of its formation, in 1877,
to 1884, had paid as benefits to the heirs of its deceased
members, and to its totally disabled members, $1,169,501.
It is a total-abstinence order. Also the order of Cadets of
Tem[)erance, Avhich saves the old by gathering in the young.
This order is fully described in " One Hundred Years of
Temperance," and it is to be hoped that it may become
^videly established in tlie country. Of these and other
associations I must omit further mention, for want of space.
They each perform their [)art in the great work, and will
find ami)le scope for all their zeal and energy in the conflict
which is upon us, to rescue our countiy and our world.
For the same reason I must omit all detailed description
of the United Temperance Association, which covers the
Dominion of Canada, as do the United Kingdom Alliance,
the British Temperance League, the Scottish Temperance
Lengue and the Irish Temperance League their respective
countries, and other like associations in all the civilized
countries and provinces of the earth. They all are at work,
and all have more than enough to do. But the hour of
redemption cometh.
POLITICAL

PARTIES

AND

THE

REFORM.

The political parties of the day have the issue between man
and alcohol to meet. The evil is a mighty fact; resolutions
will not remove it, although good to begin with. There is
an issue because there is an evil, and the issue will remain
until the evil is triumphant or destroyed.
There are but

500

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

two sides to the issue, and there are two great party organizations. They can both take part with alcohol against man,
or one of them for alcohol and the other for man, or both
can stand for man as against his great enemy. But neither
can evade the issue much longer, for wherever they take to
concealment, even if it be in the uttermost parts of the earth,
the issue will find them there. It has found them both
already, and they will never escape from it again until it is
settled. If they, or either of them, choose to be destroyed,
the opportunity is open, and an alliance with the cause of
intemperance, or an attempted evasion of the issue, will
shatter the strongest political organization which ever existed. New parties will arise when old ones fail to promote
the public good. The most patient and long-enduring people
will tire under the load this nation has carried, lo ! now
these hundred years. Political action, by State and nation,
is indispensable to the success of the temperance movement,
to the victory of man in his conflict with appetite and with
an accursed trade which is buttressed in all the fortifications
of sin, defended by all the disciplined enginery of the bottomless pit, and strengthened with billions of the golden sinews
of war.
The political party which espouses the cause of alcohol
must defeat both God and man, or it must die. No matter
how pure and glorious its past record, there is no political
organization in existence in this country to-day which can
uphold the traffic in intoxicating drinks and survive. "Whatever party shall thus prostitute its organization will soon
perish from the earth, and fortunate will it be for its memory
that it can rot.
I write from the stand-point of a Republican who would
gladly die to promote the good of his party when he can do
so and remain a patriot, but who also realizes that to him no
special responsibility or prescience is given, and that the
whole people are interested as well as he to be right. And
because the people are becoming informed, and when informed
will be right, he feels sure that ere long they will destroy
any party organization which does not assist to " pulverize
the rum power."
But when various important problems concern vitally the

THE PEOPLE, THROUGH

PAETY

OR OVER

PARTY.

501

public welfare, and all are connected each with the other, no
one issue, however great, no one "cause," however good, can
isolate itself and succeed in a party which has no occasion to
be save only on account of that one. A party with one
plank in its platform may destroy existing organizations,
or force them to purchase life by adopting a neglected issue
the consideration of which the public welfare demands. But
it is not in the power of new organizations to substitute
themselves at pleasure in the body-politic, except for the
mere purposes of agitation and the creation of opinion, for
parties which have become historic, upon which have become
concentrated the interests, affections and confidence of the
people, and through and by which the government has been
administered, and the nation led on its triumphant career of
prosperity and glory.
The people will cling to their old associations and adhere
to their tried agencies and methods until compelled to
change for the public good. But the people will not wait
forever. While we lag our children perish. The whole
problem, after all, is in the answer to one question : In what
way can the public mind be most readily convinced, and the
vote of a majority obtained?
That is a question which every man must, and which I
hope every woman soon may, decide in the forum of private
conscience, under the inspiration of the largest patriotism
and for the w^elfare of mankind.
God or Baal ! which ?
I purposely say no more on the subject in this book, and
as nearly four years ago, at the Chicago convention, I warned
the party to which I belong of impending danger, albeit
without avail, so I do now entreat not one but all parties,
and the w^hole people, to rise in their might, and by spontaneous, patriotic and righteous action, either through the
parties to which they now belong or in new organizations, to
remove from the land this great evil, which impartially curses
and ruins all we love ; and to call upon mankind everj'where
to join with them in its extirpation from the face of the
earth.

CHAPTEE
THE

woman's

christian

XXIV.
TEMPERANCE

UNION.

The W. C. T. U. both a Religious and Secular Organization — Exhortation, Enlightenment, Administration, Charity — It is Woman Organized— Ten Thousand Local Unions — National W. C. T. U. —
The Woman's Crusade — Dr. Dio Lewis — History of the Crusade, by
Sarah K. Bolton — The Story of the Crusade — Graphic Incidents —
The Woman's Crusade becomes the Woman's Christian Temperance
Union — The Chautauqua Meeting — Mrs. Annie Wittenmyer, President— Cincinnati First Ami ual Meeting, 1875 — Minneapolis Annual
Meeting, 1886 — Thirty or Forty Departments of their Temperance
Activity — Miss Francis E. Willard President since 1879 — Department of Organization — Preventive Department — Educational Department; Mrs. Mary Hunt — Social Department — Legal Department—The World's W. C. T. U., John Bright's Sister President —
Oi'ganizers and Superintendents — The Union Signal — Song as a
Power in the Work; Mrs. Elizabeth Thompson, Miss Anna Gordon
— A Few Names of Leaders.
THE Woman's Christian Temperance Union is now the
leading force in the temperance reform. It is the
greatest exclusively woman's association that exists, or ever
has existed, in the world. As woman and woman's possessions— child, husband, home — are the prey of alcohol, it
is littino; that her sex should orijanize en masse for defensive and offensive warfare against the destroyer of all that
she holds dear. The W. C. T, U. is both a religious and a
secular organization. In this respect it diifers from any
other with which I am acquainted. It can do anything of
which God will approve, within the powers of humanity, to
accomplish its great end.
It can preach and sing psalms ; it can watch and pray ; it
can lecture, print, and raise money ; it can command all
times and all seasons ; the Sabbath or the week day, there is
no hour when its work is not in order, nor in which it is not
proceeding ; all agencies belong to it, every profession and
every occupation pay it tribute when the Union summons
for assistance in its work of exhortation, enlightenment,
administration and charity.

As woman' is a part and force
502

THE

woman's

christian

TEMPERANCE

UNION.

503

in everything, the Union seeks to utilize all that she is or
can be made to be, and all that she can appropriate from the
world around her, in the great conflict that is to make her
free indeed.
There are ten thousand local unions in this countr}' ; fortyeight which embrace these local unions, each havino^ jurisdiction ofa State or Territory, save one for the District of
Columbia. The whole are merged in the National ^A^oman's
Christian Temperance Union, with two hundred thousand
active members, who hav^e also l)ecomethe great rallying and
directing force of church action for the cause of temperance
in this country ; and already existing, expanding, and rising
like a city of palaces, or a universal republic in the air resting upon the pillars of the earth, is the Woman's Christian
Tem[)erance Union of the world.
This organization is the death of the liquor trafl5c, and of
its associated vices and crimes. The tratBc never before met
such a foe as educated, organized Christian American womanhood. This is the great embarrassment to those who are
engaged in it. None realize as they do the certainty of its
destruction. The}^ feel and know it to be sure, for woman
is against it, and you will be told by any candid and intelligent man in the trade that he believes, for this reason, if for
no other, the traffic to be doomed, and its disappearance
to be l)ut a question of comparatively brief time.
The advent of woman upon the liattle-field has planted the
bloody ground all over with flowers of hope, and filled the
murky air with the ascending incense of prayers and praise,
which are answered by the descending balms and perfumes
of paradise. It is a war for life — not against it ; the great
enemy Ave seek to destroy is death.
The Woman's Crusade is now the Woman's Christian Temperance Union. The Crusade was a miracle. There is no
precedent for it in history ; and, as I read the account of its
birth and growth and career, I am impressed with the feeling
that this thing was supernatural. Here is a new force, or
an old one operating under new conditions, impelled and
guided by a head and hand that I wot not of. It has not
been repeated. There does not seem to be necessity for its
repetition, because now the Woman's

Christian Temperance

504

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

Union is abroad in the world. The Union can perform the
field-work of the Crusade even better than the mother, — but
how could the Union ever have been organized, how could it
have come to exist at all, but for a movement like the Crusade? More and more the Crusade, to my mind, ceases to
be primarily an assault upon the liquor traffic. Was it
not rather a new creation which, now that the fullness of
time had come, was to be born into the world, and were not
the strange, rapt and enthusiastic labors, in which man took
no part, save only as an attendant, the maternal struggle by
which the whole sex brought forth a new institution, a
woman force, which should be perpetual, and should work
out the higher, the supreme life of the womanhood of the
future ? I feel sure that this institution is as permanent as the
church ; its work will never be done, because it turns its
hand to everything which improves the nature and promotes
the happiness of the race, assailing and destroying first that
which injures most.
Such an institution will wax more and more unto the perfect day, when the finer and more spiritual powers of woman
shall be the directing influence to elevate both sexes to
higher standards of conduct and to more abundant fruitions
of a better life.
Dr. Dio Lewis was one of a family of five children, whose
pious mother defended her little brood as best she could
against the rum demon which dvvelt in a saloon hard by,
where the husband and father devoted soul, body and substance to destruction, and his family to abuse, starvation
and despair. But that mother would not despair ; and she,
with a few other women, surrounded the saloon-keeper,
turned his den for a time into a house of prayer, and besought him to abandon the business which was destroying
their homes. They were successful. Forty years later,
Mr. Lewis, who had become an eminent educator, was
speaking in a small town in Ohio upon the subject of temperance. Relating this incident of his early life, he requested
all who would follow the example of his mother to rise. It
is said that the whole congregation rose. At once a meeting was appointed to be held in the Presbyterian Church the
next morning.
Dr. Lewis was a ouest at the mansion of

^Mi

-%-

>

Mrs. E. y.

Thompson,

Mother of the Crusade.

ORIGIN

OF

THE

WOMAN's

CRUSADE.

505

Ex-Governor Trimble, the father of Mrs. E. J. Thompson,
the wife of Judge James H. Thompson of Hillsboro, Ohio,
one of the leading lawyers of the State. Mrs. Thompson is
a highly accomplished, devoted, Christian woman, the
mother of eight children.
I must quote the facts mainly from the history of the Crusade written by Mrs. Sarah K. Bolton, and published in
tlie centennial volume of 1876, who Avas a principal part
of the wonderful siovy she relates. Mrs. Thompson was
not present at the lecture of the evening of December 23,
by Dr. Lewis, but was "prepared," as she herself writes,
" ' as those who watch for the morning,' for the first gray
light upon this dark night of sorrow. Few comments Avere
made in our house upon this new line of policy, until after
breakfast the next morning, when, just as we gathered about
the hearth-stone, my daughter jNIary said, very gentlj",
'Mother, Avill you go to the meeting this morning?' Hesitatingly Ireplied : ' I don't know yet what I shall do.'
My husband, fully appreciating the responsibility of the
moment, said : ' Children, let us leave your mother alone ;
for you know" Avhere she goes with all vexed questions,' and,
pointing to the old family Bil>lc, left the room. The awful
responsibility of the step that I must needs next take was
wonderfully relieved by the thought of the 'cloudy pillar'
and ' parted waters ' of the past; hence, with confidence, I
Avas about turning my e3-e of faith ' up to the hills ' from
Avhence had come my help, Avhcn, in response to a gentle tap
at my door, I met my dear ]\Iary, who, Avith her Bible in her
hand, and tearful eyes, said 'Mother, I opened to the 14(3th
Psalm, and I believe it is for you.' She Avithdrew, and I
sat down to read the AA'onderful message from God. As I
read Avhat I had so often read before, the spirit so strangely
' took of the things of God,' and showed me new meaning,
I no longer hesitated, but, on the strength thus imparted,
started to the scene of action."
This is the Psalm that she read :
"Praise ye the Lord.
Praise the Lord, O iny soul.
" While I live will I praise the Lord : I will sing praises untomy God while I haA^e any being.

506

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

" Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom
there is no help.
"His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth; in that
very day his thoughts perish.
" Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose
hope is in the Lord his God :
"Which made heaven, and earth, the sea, and all that therein
is : which keepeth truth forever :
" Which executeth judgment for the oppressed : which giveth
food to the hungry.
The Lord looseth the prisoners :
" The Lord openeth the eyes of the blind : the Lord raiseth
them that are bowed down : the Lord loveth the righteous :
"The Lord preserveth the strangers; he relieveth the fatherless and widow: but the way of the wicked he turneth upside
down.
" The Lord shall reign forever, even thy God, O Zion, unto all
generations.

Praise ye the Lord."

The Crusade was born.

The Mother of it proceeds :

" Upon entering the church, I was startled to find myself chosen
their leader. The old Bible was taken from the desk, and the
146th Psalm was read. Mrs. Gen. McDowell, by request, led in
prayer, and, although she had never before heard her own voice in
a public prayer, on this occasion the 'tongue of fire' sat upon her,
and all were deeply affected. Mrs. Cowden, our Methodist minister's wife, was then requested to sing a familiar air :
" ' Give to the winds thy fears,
Hope and be undismayed :
God hears tliy sighs and counts thy tears:
He will lift up thy head.'

and, whilst thus engaged, the women (seventy-five in number)
fell in line, two and two, and proceeded first to the drug-stores
and then to the hotels and saloons."
Oh ! Mother of the Woman's Crusade ! But one mother
ever bore greater blessing to this heart-broken world — and
the Crusade was the child of inspiration too ! For more
than six months this sacred band visited the saloons almost
daily. The incidents which follow I select from Mrs. Bolton's history, which is intensely interesting, and I am sorry
that I am obliged, by unavoidable condensation, to omit so
much.

THE woman's

crusade.

507

"One man, a druggist, selling illegally, and refusing to discontinue,a' tabernacle ' was built in front of his store, where, dayafter day, the women held a continuous prayer-meeting from
early morning till late at night. An injunction was procured by
him, through the courts, and the women sued for 810,000 damages, resulting in good, because it arrested the attention of the
entire country. This delayed the street work, as the women did
not desire to defy the law, but other temperance work was actively engaged in."
Immediately the women organized in Washington Court
House, an adjoining town, led by Mrs. jNI. G. Carpenter,
who drew up an appeal, which was also used much in other
States.
lows :

Mrs. M. V. Ustick, the secretary, writes as fol-

"The following morning, after an hour of prayer, forty-four
women filed slowly and solemnly down the aisle, and started forth
on their strange mission with fear and trembling, while the male
l^ortion of the audience remained at the church to pray for the
success of this new undertaking — the tolling of the church bell
keeping time to the solemn march of the women as they wended
their way to the first drug-store on the list (the number of places
within the city limits where intoxicating drinks were sold was
fourteen — eleven saloons and three drug-stores). Here, as in
every place, they entered singing, every woman taking up the
sacred strain as she crossed the threshold. This was followed
by the reading of the appeal and prayer ; then earnest pleading to
desist from their soul-destroying traffic and to sign tlie dealers'
pledge. Thus, all day long, going from place to place, without
stopping even for dinner or lunch, till five o'clock, meeting with
no marked success, but invaria1)le courtesy extended to them.
The next day an increased number of women went forth, leaving
the men in church, in prayer, all day long. On this day the contest really began, and at the first place the doors were found
locked. With hearts full of compassion, the women knelt in the
snow upon the pavement, to plead for the divine influence upon
the heart of the liquor-dealer, and there held their first street
prayer-meeting.
" There was a long resistance, but finally the liquor-dealer suirendered his stock of liquors of every kind and variety to the
Avomen, in answer to their prayers and entreaties, and it was by
them poured into the street. Nearly a thousand men, wotnen
and children witnessed the mingling of beer, ale, wine and whisky

508

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

as they filled the gutters and were drunk iip by the earth, while
bells were ringing, men and boys shouting, and women singing
and praying to God, who had given the victory.
" On the fourth day the campaign reached its height — the town
being filled with visitors from all parts of the country and adjoining viihages. Another public surrender and pouring into the
street of a larger stock of liquors than on the previous day, and
more intense excitement and enthusiasm. In eight days all the
saloons, eleven in number, had been closed, and the three drugstores pledged to sell only on prescription."
This was a complete victory over the local liquor power —
but the end was not yet. The organized capital and personal
combinations behind now came to the rescue of their endangered craft.
"Early in the third week the discouraging intelligence came
that a new man had taken out license to sell liquor in one of the
deserted saloons, and that he was backed by a whisky house in
Cincinnati, to the amount of 15000, to break down this movement.
On Wednesday, the 14th, the whisky was unloaded at his room.
About forty women were on the ground, and followed the liquor
in, and remained holding an uninterrupted prayer-meeting all day
and until eleven o'clock at night.
" The next day — bitterly cold — was spent in the same place
and manner, without fire or chairs, two hours of that time the
women being locked in, while the proprietor was off attending a
trial.
"On the following day, the coldest of all the winter o/'1874, the
women were locked out, and stood on the street^ holding religious
services all day long. Next morning a 'tabernacle' was built in
the street, just in front of the house, and was occupied for the
double purpose of watching and prayer, through the day ; but
before night the sheriff closed the saloon, and the proprietor surrendered.
"A short time after, on a dying bed, this four-days liquor
dealer sent for some of these -women, telling them their songs and
prayers had never ceased to ring in his ears, and urging them to
pray again in his behalf ; so he passed away."
Such was the nature of the work. No one will say that
this was an ordinary manifestation of the working of human
nature. Contemplate it as we will, search for precedents
and historical parallels as we may — and there are none of

THE woman's

crusade.

509

which I have any knowledge. The movement rapidly spread
through many States. " In Waynesburg, where there had
been open saloons for seventy-six years, every one was
closed." In Xenia, a city of 10,000 people, after a long
struggle, in which wholesale dealers were })resent urixin<»"
resistance, and offering capital and liquor free of cost, " hour
after hour, the women, keeping guard on three sides of the
house, continued their singing and praying." At last human
nature could resist no longer, the keeper yielded, "and, amid
the ringing of church-bells, and the laughing and cryinix,
singing and thanksgiving of the people, barrels of beer,
whisky and brandy were poured together into the streets.
He at once opened a meat market, and was well {);itronized."
In Bellefontaine, a large dealer threatened to shoot the
women if he was disturbed — there was a great fight with
him and his men — but after a week he " made his appearance at a mass meeting, signed the pledge, and the following
Sabbath attended church — the first time in five years." In
Clyde, the proprietor of a large saloon informed the band
that he would spill the last droj) of his l)lo()d for his li(juor
and his trade, and threw a })ail of water upon the head of
the one who was praying.
" Without stopping an instant, she said, ' O Lord, we are
now baptized for the work.' The effect was magical. All
were quiet, and the victory was complete. The saloonkeeper went with them to church, where the most earnest
prayers were offered for him."
In the larger places — the cities — the work was more
difficult ; but much was accomplished even there. In Cincinnati, forty-three devoted women were lodged in jail for
obstructing the sidewalks. "While there they went about
doing good among the other prisoners. They conquered in
Cleveland, but not without being subjected to insult and
violence ; some even lost their lives from exposure.
It will be impossible to give more of detail of the Crusade
either in Ohio or in Indiana, Illinois, V/isconsin, Iowa,
Nebraska, Kansas, California, Oregon, JSTew York, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, Maryland and the South, in all which
States it greatly prevailed.
Nor is it necessary.
I wish to call attention to the events and the state of mind

510

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

in which the people were when the Woman's Christian Temperance Union was formed, and but for which such an organization would have been as impossible as to have organized
the government of the United States without its being preceded by the Re\^olutionary war. In this great moral commotion woman escaped and learned her power. You will
never caije her aofain. Enthusiasm is but an intermittent
spring or spouting geyser, and, after a few months of tidalwave-like activity, which swept away indeed all movable
structures, and, as water will, developed the symptoms of
hydrophobia in the liquor traffic, the Crusaders found that
intemperance was a part of the solid continent itself; that
the foundations of its empire were interblended with the settled habits of the people, and with the customs, constitutions
and laws of the republic; that the Crusaders were, in fact,
contendino; with o^eoloo-ical formations, and must remove
the foundations of the everlasting hills. And what were
these gentle women, after all, with their prayers and psalms
and tears and ribbons? Certainly they were as valiant as
ever. They still had flags and sacred fury, and they had
conquered and converted the saloon-keeper. But the trade
did not cease. There seemed to be inexhaustible supplies,
which came in at every point and moment of relaxation. In
fact, the Crusade had come to solid rock, which cared no
more for them than the Rocky Mountains care for the summer rain. And so these isolated groups of armed women
stood all over the country, amazed and looking up ; and, as.
they gazed, the Spirit of Organization descended upon them
and filled the whole place.
The Woman's Crusade was now the Woman's Christian
Temperance Union.
Early in the year 1874, the women in several of the crusading States called conventions and organized temperance
leagues. In August, the first National Sunday-School Convention Avas held, at Chautauqua Lake. The same kind of
people were there that were engaged in the Crusade, and,
during the progress of this Sunday-school convention, several temperance meetings were held, and the women were
moved to undertake the crystallization of the Crusade into a.

Miss Frances E.

Willard,

President National W. C. T. U.

THE

WOxMAN's

christian

TEMPERANCE

UNION.

511

permanent force by its nationalization. They created a committee of organization, and issued an address, signed by
Jennie F. Willing, chairman, and Emily Huntington INIiller^
secretary, of the Chautauqua meeting. I quote a portion of
this important instrument :
"
Many of the most earnest Avorkers in the woman's
temperance movement, from different parts of the Union and
different denominations of Christians, wei-e present, and the conviction was general that a more favorable opportunity would not
soon be presented for taking the preliminary steps toward organizing a national league, to make permanent tlic grand work of the
last few months. After much deliberation and prayer, a committee of organization was appointed, consisting of one lady from
each State, to interest temperance workers in this effort. A
national convention Avas ap])ointed to be held in Cleveland, Ohio,
during tiie month of November, tlie exact date to be fi.ved by the
committee of organization. The chairman and secretary of the
Chautauqua meeting were authorized to issue a circular letter, asking the Woman's Temperance Leagues to hold conventions fortlie
])urpose of electing one woman from eacli Congressional district as
a delegate to the Cleveland convention.
" It is hardly necessary to remind those Avho have worked so
nobly in the grand temperance uprising that in union and organization are its success and permanence, and tlie consequent redemption of this land from the curse of intemperance.
"In the name of our Master — in behalf of the thousands of
women who suffer from this terrible evil — we call upon all to
unite in an earnest, continued effort to hold the ground already
won, and move onward together to a complete victory over the
foes we tight."
I quote now from ]\Iiss Willard :
"The convention was held in Cleveland November 18, 19, 20,
1874, and was attended by delegates representing sixteen States.
A constitution was adopted, also a plan of organization
intended to reach every hamlet, town and city in the land. There
was a declaration of principles, of which Christianity alone could
have furnished the animus. An appeal to the women of oui' country was provided for ; another to the _2:irls of America ; a third to
lands beyond the sea ; a memorial to Congress w^as ordered, and a
deputation to carry it appointed ; a national temperance paper, to
be edited and published by women, w^as agreed upon, also a finan-

512

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

cial plan, asking a cent a week from members ; and last, not least,
was appointed a special committee on temperance work among
children. Four large mass meetings were held during the convention, all of them addressed by women, though the chief meetings were held in a Pi'esbyterian church,* as was the convention
itself. Mrs. Annie Wittenmyer of Pliiladelphia was elected president Miss
;
Frances E. Willard of Chicago, corresponding secretary Mrs.
;
Mary C. Johnson of Brooklyn, recording secretary ;
Mrs. Mary A. Ingham of Cleveland, treasurer ; Avith one vicepresident from each State represented in the convention."
These names are now well known not only in our own
land, but in other lands, and are as immortal as those of the
fathers of the republic.
The spirit of the convention was thus voiced by " a prominent member," Miss Willard, I suppose :
" Woman is ordained to lead the vano-uard of this orreat
movement, until the American public is borne across the
abysmal transition from the superstitious notion that ' alcohol
is food,' to the scientific fact that alcohol is poison, from the
pusillanimous concession that intemperance is a great evil, to
the responsible conviction that the liquor trafiic is a crime."
The word " league " soon disappeared in " union." After
passing the following wonderful resolution, which every
member seems to know by heart, and with which they conjure all " difiiculties and dangers," and "conquer a peace"
with everybody, including themselves, if there be occasion
for it, the convention adjourned ; and the Woman's Christian
Temperance Union entered upon its great career :
'■'•Resolved^ That, recognizing the fact that our cause is and is
to be combated by mighty, determined and relentless forces, we
will, trusting in Him who is the Prince of Peace, meet argument
with argument, misjudgment with patience, denunciation with
kindness, and all our difficulties and dangers with prayer."
The first annual meeting of the Union was held in
Cincinnati, November 17, 18, 19, 1875. Delegates from
twenty-two States furnished their credentials. Just read the
following embodiment of what these women were doing, and
of their own conception of the greatness and sublimity of
* That cradle ougV.t to be kept in the family.

THE

\V. C. T.

U.

CINCINNATI

ANNUAL

MEETING.

513

their work.
It is the opening of the first annual report of
IVIiss Willard, the corresponding secretary ;
" To-day we reach a milestone in our slow but steadfast march
toward victory. On this sacred battle-ground of the Crusade, the
procession of States pauses for roll-call. In stately senate chamber and on heroic field, their dear familiar names, ' from Maine to
California,' have thrilled the ears of patriots in the gloi'ious days
of old. The hurrying crowd would smile to hear it said — if indeed
the utterance should gain its ear at all — that never did the sisterhood of States pass in review on an occasion more full of inspiration and hope than at this quiet hour and in this solemn place,
where, for the sake of cross and flag, we meet to pray. But history shall yet bear witness that the enthusiasm of the prediction
has crystallized into the blessed fact of its fulfillment. We first
call
MAINE,

which long ago achieved for its time-honored motto, ' I direct,'
the proud significance of leading where the Union shall yet follow,
into the safe harbor of prohibitory law."
And so she proceeds with the roll-call, giving a sketch of
the work in each State during the year. At this meeting, the following resolution was adopted. Such things —
and worse — will continue to happen unless women are again
chained. But it is not as bad or heterodox as were similar
demands by men a century and a quarter ago. Political
freedom consists in permitting to all who are fitted to exercise it his or her aliquot paii; of that sovereignty which,
under the divine-right rule, we now vest in men only
(pretty tough custodians of a divine right they are, many
of them ; but it is better that they all have it) and which,
in despotic governments, is, by a still more grievous theft,
vested in one man alone.
" Resolved finally^ That, whereas women are the greatest
sufferers from the liquor traffic, and realizing that it is to be
ultimately suppressed by means of the ballot, we, the Christian
women of the land, in convention assembled, do pray Almighty
God, and all true men, that the question of the prohibition of the
liquor traffic should be submitted to all the adult citizens of this
country, irrespective of sex, not as a means of enlarging our
33

514

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

rights or of antagonizing the sexes, but as a means of protecting
ourselves, our children and homes, from the ravages of the rum
power."
And that appeal was made twelve years ago. There has
never been a moment since when woman's ballot would not
have destroyed the rum traffic, and ended all this tremendous conflict Avhich engrosses heaven and earth and hell at a
blow. Yet nowhere has woman voted on the question.
Statesmen, philanthropists, clergymen, priests and jurists,
men generally, hesitate, but the producer and consumer of
strong drink do not hesitate. Avarice, ignorance and
drunkenness know what would destroy them ; and these
"sovereigns" still dominate in nation, state and municipality — still drag civilization and Christianity and the " angel
sex" — "dear, lovely woman," as they are pleased to call
her — at the chariot wheels of rum's Juggernaut.
This is not a history ; if it were, volumes, instead of
pages, should be given to the Woman's Christian Temperance
Union. It is now thirteen years since its organization. They
have been years of extraordinary enthusiasm, expansion and
success. I have before me the minutes of the last annual
meeting, which was held in Minneapolis from October 22 to
27, 1886. A volume larger than this, and full of tersely
expressed and valuable matter to the bursting, describing the
work and progress of the Union for a single year.
Twenty-two large, closely printed pages are occupied by
the mere list of the names of the superintendents of the various branches of work in the States, each superintendent having an allotted subject or branch of labor, and often requiring
assistance in the discharge of the duty of superintendence.
On one page I count the names of forty-three superintendents. To give an idea of the work itself, read the list of
subjects over which the Union takes jurisdiction in the State
of Ohio. For each there is a superintendent, but I omit the
name for want of space.
Juvenile work, Sunday-school work, Scientific Temperance
Instruction, Sabbath Observance, Legislative work. Young
Women's work, Bible Readings, Evangelistic work among
Railroad Employees, Efforts to induce Corporations to re-

THE

W. C. T. U. — DEPARTMENTS.

515

quire Total Abstinence in their Employees, Friendly Inns,
Flower Mission, Woman's Exchange, Prison and Police work,
Health and Heredity, Unfermented Wine on Lord's Table,
Department of Statistics, work among Colored People, State
and County Fairs, Conference with Ecclesiastical, Educational, Medical and other bodies, Franchise, Suppression of
Impure Literature, Railroad Rates, Agent for Union Signal
and Memorial Book, Parlor Meetings, Relative Statistics,
Literature, Peace, Social Purity. Every State and Territory
is organized, with president, secretary and other officers, a
large number with about the same division of work as in
Ohio, and all of them so as to bring to bear the power of the
Union for the good of the people, in almost every way in
which that good can be promoted, and all striking home
directly at intemperance and social vice. Xor is the work
reformatory alone ; it is far more preventive and creative.
It begins with the dawn of new life and guards the jrenerations as they rise.
All this work in the States and Territories, with the exterior and foreign relations of the Union, is under the general
control of the national organization, the headquarters of
which are in New York and Chicago. Of the national
organization Miss Frances E. Willard has been president
since the retirement of Mrs. Wittenmyer, who, with great
zeal, vigor and success, held this exacting and responsible
office during the first five years of its existence. Mrs. Caroline B. Buell is corresponding secretary, Mrs. Mary A.
Woodbridge recording secretary, Mrs. L. M. N. Stevens
assistant recording secretary, and Miss Esther Pugh is treasurer. It is safe to say that these five women perform as
much labor, probably more than has been done by the
President and Cabinet of any national administration ; and
who shall dare to say that, with the exception of the great
emergencies which involved national existence, their work
has not been as important for the welfare of mankind, and
that it has not been performed with as much ability as the
work of any administration in our history. The work of the
National Woman's Christian Temperance Union is divided
into departments, each of which has a superintendent, and
sometimes several.

516

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

I. Department of Organization. — Superintendents, Miss
Willard and Mrs. Caroline B. Buell. Work in the Soutliern
States, Mrs. Sallie F. Cliapin, who is at the South what Miss
Willard is at the North, and who has done as much to promote peace in the hearts of an estranged people as any single
personal influence of our time. Then, there is a corps of
organizers, consisting of eight women, located at proper
points throughout the country ; three national lecturers ; then,
" Eeconnoissance for World's W. C. T. U.," by Mrs. Mary
Clement Leavitt, who just now sends a message from Rangoon. A year since she had travelled more than twentyseven thousand miles, besides frequently unnoted distances,
about her Master's business, had held 493 meetings, forming
unions and interviewing rulers or writing to them, and having been refused audiences in but two instances — by the
Empress of Japan and by the royal governor of Tasmania —
one a heathen. I am in doubt about the other, but both
refused to entertain an ansrel unawares. Mrs. Leavitt will
soon reach Africa. She is belting the globe with signal-stations of heavenly light. Such a voyage is an era in maritime affairs, and will accomplish more for the honor and
glory of our countr}'^, and for the good of man, than to
rebuild a navy by the expenditure of hundreds of millions
of gold, and exhibit our flag and our emblems of destruction
in every port of the world.
Next comes Work among Foreign-Speaking People, with
two superintendents and assistants, among Germans, Scandinavians, Hollanders, Chinese, Poles and Spaniards. Then
Work among Colored People North. Then Young Women's
Work, of which it is to be said that it is not only most efficient for the actual work of to-day in all departments — but
here is the Woman's Christian Temperance Union of the
future, the W. C. T. U. in perpetuam^ as the lawyers say.
It is the training-school, the recruiting-ground of the army,
of which Mrs. Frances J. Barnes is the indefatigable and
efficient superintendent. A department organizer, the Juvenile Work and Chalk Talker, this completes the divisions of
the Department of Organization.
II. Preventive Department. — Divisions : Heredity, Dr.
Mary Weeks Burnett, superintendent ; Health, Dr. Bessie

Mrs. Mary A.

Woodbridge,

Recording Secretary, y.ifi.fiial Jf. C. T. U.

THE

W.

C. T. U.

EDUCATIONAL

DEPARTMENT.

517

F. Cushman, superintendent; Day Nurseries, Miss Ellen
Hood, superintendent; — two able physicians in this department.
III. Educational Department. — Divisions : Scientific
Temperance Instruction, Mrs. Mary H. Hunt, superintendent, with secretary and advisory committee of five persons.
The work accomplished in this department already is of
incalculable importance to the country and to the world.
This is holy ground. I can write somewhat from personal
knowledge of the work of Mrs. Hunt in the Division of Scientific Temperance Instruction. Under her wise and able
leadership, laws requiring the compulsory study of the principles of temperance, in text-books properly adapted to the
capacity of the pupil, already have been enacted in seventeen States, while an excellent national law carries scientific
temperance into the common schools of the District of
Columbia, into all the Territories, and into the military and
naval schools of the United States. Great service has been
rendered by Mrs. Hunt in promotion of the bill providing
national aid to common schools, and the final success of which
I doubt not under her al)le management in carrying out the
instruction of the National Union, which has adopted the bill
as a most important temperance measure. Indeed, it seems
to be time wasted to secure laws for the study of temperance
in schools, unless there be first provided suitable and sufficient schools.
The Division for Organization and Instruction in Schools
of Higher Education, Kindergarten Work, Kitchen Garden,
and Industrial Training, Sunday-School AVork, a very important and successful division, at the head of which I have
long been proud to see the name of ]Miss Lucia E. F. Kimball, a native of my own State, whom I have known from her
childhood, and whose numerous friends have watched her useful career with constantly increasing admiration and regard.
Woman's Temperance Publication Association, which employs sixty persons, five editors, and is out of debt, Temperance Literature, Advisory Committee for Dime Collection
(eight members), the Union Signal, — the organ of the
Union, — the Press, Suppression of Impure Literature, Relation of Temperance to Labor, National Hospital and Train-

518

THE TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

ing-School
for Nurses, Training-School
for Temperance
Workers, Narcotics.
IV. Evangelistic Department. — Divisions : Evangelistic
Work, Work in Prison, Jails, Police and Almshouses, Work
among Railroad Employees, Work among Soldiers and Sailors, Work among Lumber Men, Work among Miners, to secure the use of Unferraented Wine at the Lord's Table, Day
of Prayer and Week of Prayer, Social Purity, Work among
Mormon Women, Sabbath Observance, Flower Mission.
V. Social Department. — Divisions: Parlor Meetings,
State and County Fairs.
VI. Legal Department. — Divisions : Legislation and
Petitions, Franchise, Railroad Rates, Standing Committees
on Music, on the Status of the Bible in the Public Schools,
on Co-operation of National W. C. T. U. with Associated
Charities.
This enumeration gives the outline of the work, but conveys little conception of the vast numbers engaged in it,
or the mighty play of the two hundred thousand selected
spirits who are the living stones in this fairest earthly temple
of God.
Out of the National Woman's Christian Temperance Union
has grown that of the world. Mrs. Margaret B. Lucas,
sister to John Bright, president ; Miss Frances E. Willard,
vice-president for the United States ; Mrs. Letitia Youmans,
for the Dominion of Canada ; Mrs. Dr. Whitney, for the
Hawaiian Islands, New Zealand ; Mrs. Judge Ward, New
Zealand; Madame Andersson Meijerhelm, Sweden; Mrs.
W. E. Locke, Bulgaria ; Miss M. W, Leitch, Ceylon ; Mrs.
Brenthnall, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; American secretary, Mrs. Hannah Whitall Smith ; British secretary, Mrs.
Mary AVhitall Costelloe ; American treasurer, Miss Esther
Pugh ; British treasurer, Mrs. E. Gregson.
Organizers for Europe. — Miss Charlotte A. Gray;
Madame Andersson Meijerhelm, for Northern Europe.
Superintendents. — Mrs. Mary B. Willard, general superintendent press department, Berlin, Prussia.
American Superintendents. — Legal Department, Mrs.
John P. Newman ; Press Department, Mrs. Clara L. Roach ;
Bible-Reading Department, Mrs. Hannah Whitall Smith.

THE

NATIONAL

W. C. T. U.

THE

UNION

SIGNAL.

519

The Union Signal, for several years, and until failing health
compelled her retirement, so ably edited by Mrs. Mary B.
Willard, is now under the literary management of Miss Mary
Allen AVest, It is a perfect clearing-house of temperance
information, especially of all that relates to the work and
condition of the union. The cause of temperance has no
more able, aggressive or judicious pen in its service than that
of Miss West.
The Signal was founded through the efforts of Mrs. Matilda B. Carse, a woman of extraordinary energy and ability,
"who has demonstrated that her sex has unsurpassed business
powers. Her life, one of bereavement and much personal
sorrow, is now wholly devoted to the relief of others' woes,
and to comprehensive plans to promote the growth and permanency of the Union and the Avelfare of humanity.
The Signal is organized in the interest of the W. C. T. U.,
has $25,000 capital stock, divided into shares of $25 each ;
nearly 50,000 weekly circulation, which is rapidly increasing. Mrs. Carse, Avho is the publisher and business manager
of the Woman's Temperance Publication Association, is now
engaged in the erection of the AVoman's Christian Union
Home in Chicago. The lot, already purchased, is in a most
eligible location in the city. The structure, the plans of
which are drawn already, is to be twelve stories high, and
the income is to be devoted to the work of the Union. The
estimated cost is one million dollars, and will furnish complete business accommodations to the Union, and much space
in addition for rent. The Home of the Union is going up.
It would be pronounced impossible by mere mortals, but anything seems to be possible to Mrs. Carse, and in Chicago.
And now I am to state the most astonishing fact of the
whole, that is, to a man. During the first eight years of the
work of the National Woman's Christian Temperance Union,
its income averaged not over one thousand dollars a year.
Durinir all that time, it had not a sin2:le salaried officer, and
now has but one — its corresponding secretary, at $1000 per
year, while a private secretary is furnished the president at
$600.
The present income of the society is but from eight to ten
thousand dollars yearly, and with all this immense labor and

520

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

expenditure the Union is of course greatly embarrassed at
times, and in fact nearly always, with arrearages which are
the source of great anxiety to its leaders. The generous
philanthropy of this country, often praying to God to know
how to invest money so as to yield the largest returns to His
cause and for the happiness of the race, should fill the treasury of the Union to overflowing, and provide for its future
as well as present wants, by contributions and permanent
benefactions. This work has so far been done by the consecration ofthe highest and best gifts of the thousands who
are engaged in it, for now these thirteen years, without money
and without price for their personal services. The human
race has no story like it ; and the men of this proud and
wealthy American nation can point to a lofty type of womanhood, developed by Christianity and republican institutions,
of whom the world has no other example. What a pity —
should I say shame ? — that these women want for mere
money, when with them so little does so much ! Think of a
woman, like Frances E. Willard, going through our country
and world — doing what she does, and as she does it, without a dollar reward for the expenditure of this consecrated
life, worried for money — half the time fed by God's ravens,
with nothing but faith, hope and love to live on now, and no
provision whatever for age, when this brilliant career shall
halt and this voice from heaven shall fail from the earth !
And she is but one of so many. It is at once their glory
and our shame. I sometimes wish I was not a man ; or that,
being one, I had more money. I hope those who have will
read this chapter. What would not these women accomplish with a million a year !
The superintendent of Southern work, one of the most accomplished women the country ever knew, Mrs. Sallie F.
Chapin of Charleston, S. C, has, during twelve years last
past, labored night and day for the redemption of that portion of our common country from the worst plague that ever
afflicted it, and the astonishing prevalence of prohibition
sentiment in the South is the abundant reward of her labors.
With her have been associated Mrs. Sibley of Georgia, and
Mrs. Merrick of New Orleans, Mrs. Meriwether of Tennessee, Mrs. Snell of Mississippi, and many other of the

Mrs.

C. B. Btieli,

Corresponding Secretary Natio7ial Jf. C. T. U.

THE

W. C. T. U.

TESIPERANCE

SONG.

521

selectest women of the South, whose prayers and tears during
the Ions: niirht of weary waitins: are now turning into sono-s of
praise and victory. Sometime it will be known how the real
union of these States was first restored in the hearts of the
women of the North and the South, whose souls first fused
together in this great struggle to rescue the whole country
from an evil compared with which the war, with all its causes,
was a trifle. Whatever foreign complications may arise, so
long as the National Christian Temperance Union lasts, this
nation shall learn civil war no more. If brotherhood will
not keep the peace, then sisterhood will preserve it.
The Crusade was half song. In fact, music is the vehicle
of moral transitions. It is both an accompaniment and a
weapon of revolution. Lately the Union has turned attention more and more to its neglected power as an agent for
the regeneration of human nature.
I am not about to write of it, but I wish to say that I do
not think this force is as yet fully comprehended, certainly
not utilized, as a creative and elevating influence upon the
whole human being. It will perhaps be remembered that
Mrs. Elizabeth Thompson, the philanthropist, whose lienefactions and personal inspiration have vitalized the energies
of so many willing workers for the welfare of the race, and
lifted up many a " heart bowed down with grief," while
every good cause shall rise up to call her memory blessed,
has lately started the idea of song-service among the poor.
In various parts of the country it has been adopted, with
remarkable results. I quote from Prof. Alfred Andrews,
who has lately published a simple and valuable lesson-book
for the easy training of the old and young " to lift up their
voices in praise or song " :
" The author of a Q-reat work on moral education has given
the philosophical explanation why vocal music affects the moral
nature, and among other things says that there is no moral power
in edueation equal to the voice of the pupil ; that the chief and
most beneficent moral exercise is that in which the voice goes
forth, with all its emotional strength, in the expression of feeling
in song ; and that the school in which song is not a prominent
part of its exercises is not a moral school, for song is a great moral
element.

522

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

" True song is a gush of feeling, and is therefore moral education in its purity. Songs are the highways of angels to human
hearts ; and when you close these highways and shut out the angels
the devils are free to come in their place."
Mrs. Thompson's idea was lately utilized by the Baptist
Social Union of Boston, in its social and missionary work.
A district was selected in which many workmen lived, and
there was a strons; desire to o-et them more interested in
religious affairs. Special invitations were sent to five thousand — all men and American workmen — to be present at
a " sacred concert." Eight hundred came. They were
delighted, and brought many more with them to the next
concert, and after that one came again, when, by invitation,
they brought their wives.
I quote from the press account :
" The church was now crowded to overflowing
The
best singers and the best music that could be had were none
too good for the working-men

and the working-women

of the

South End." The concert was so arranged that often all
could take part — singing "America" and like tunes. The
result has been to fill the church, and keep it full of its new
occupants, whom the best preaching alone never would have
allured to the sanctuary.
Mrs. Thompson writes :
" If a nation may be made to drift into war by the influence of
.martial music, why may not the spirit of peace be generated and
infused by the influence of sacred music and song ?
" The poet Lowell says : ' One of His sweetest charities is
music'
" In our poor-houses there are old men and women, sad, hopeless, weary — long strangers to any gentle ministrations. In our
prisons there are dull intellects, and hearts hardened against open
religious efforts ; in our hospitals there are suffering ones so worn
with pain, so weak, so near the world for which, alas ! they have
received no preparation, — to all these might be borne on the
wings of song the words of life from Him who came ' to preach
the gospel to the poor, to heal the broken-hearted, to set at liberty
them that are bruised.'
" A Christian song has this advantage over a sermon — the
truth in it touches the heart of the hearer unawares, when he is
not on the defensive against the gospel.

Aliss Esther Pugk,
Ti'eas. National J J'. C. T. U.

THE

W.

C. T. U,

TEMPERANCE

SONG.

523

" Specially successful may the hymn be if some helpful thought
is repeated over and over, as in the refrains of the choruses. This
will fasten on many a hearer, and sing itself in his mind hours and
days after it was heard.
" Educate the hearts of the people by sacred music, and the
heart will readily educate the head."
And she adds in a note to me last July :
" I wish you could see the need and the use of giving the people
music. Could you make the American people a singing people,
you would soon see a change in their morals. Sing ! — I wish
every one could and would sing, and I pray God to inspire you
with the idea of making music and temperance go together, and
so help each other along."
Now, there is more in this than may be dreamed of in our
philosophy. Both praise and prayer appeal to primary elements and emotions of the soul — and the most of us are
more accessible through praise than prayer. Even sinners
feel that they have a right to help along the singing ; but as
for pra3^er, that is a different thing — only for the saints —
very few are good enough to pray in public — only the minister, the deacons, and a few of the very best. However all
this is to be explained, if it can be explained, the fact is a
M^hole congregation and "innumerable multitudes" will 3'ield
to sons;, and sins^ themselves also, when nothing else seems
to stir them at all. I am inclined to think the poet had an
impression of what is coming when he broke forth as though
he began to hear it :
" When shall the sound of singing
Flow joj-f ully along !
"\Mien hill and valley, ringing
With one ti'iumphant song,
Proclaim the contest ended,
And He who once was slain,
Again to earth descended.
Returns in bliss to reign."
And the Woman's Christian Temperance Union is developing more and more the idea to which Mrs. Thompson calls
attention in this timely way.
Miss Anna Gordon, who is like another right arm to Miss
Willard (but she has one for her own use also) , and others

524

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

are utilizing more and more this comparatively miused agency
of sonor. If I could write a word which would encourao;e
the feeling that they are developing a new sense, as it were,
or rather one of which the world has vaguely known, and
conceived to belong to the few, but which now is to become
the possession of the many, and as much a means of reform,
regeneration and happiness as reading, preaching, praying
or the universal development of artistic powers, I should
deem myself most fortunate. But this chapter must close
with mention of scarce any of the great leaders of the
Union ; for the time would fail me to speak of Mrs. Woodbridge, Mrs. Foster, Mrs. Buell, Mrs. Burt, Mrs. Lathrop
and Miss Coleman, who has created a temperance literature
almost of her own intellectual and business powers, Mrs.
Stevens, Miss Pugh, Mrs. Newman of Washington and Mrs.
Newman of Nebraska, Mrs. Barnes, Dr. Burnett, Mrs.
Barney, Miss Smith, Mrs. Wallace, Mrs. White, Mrs.
Knox, Mrs. Gordon, Miss Briggs and Miss Brown, whom
I have personally known, and seen in the prosecution of
their mighty work, and a thousand others who in every
State and Territory and on every inch of our national soil —
and beyond it — have wrought and still are working for the
good of man and the glory of God, in season and out of
season, accomplishing their great mission on earth — who by
their faith have removed mountains — of whom the world
is not worthy.
And some are not, for God has taken them.
Of Miss Francis E. Willard, the President of the Woman's
National Christian Temperance Union, I had intended to
write ; but I will not mar the felicity of her fame by an
attempted portrayal of her accomplishments, her powers
and her worth. She leads the wonderful organization, selected from the world's Christian womanhood, and embracing
the highest forces operating in the forefront of civilization,
with the valor of Alexander, the sagacity of Fabius, the
patience and piety of Washington. She is a woman. To
belono; to the Union is a his-h honor. To lead it is a still
higher honor. To lead it as it is led is almost impossible to
human powers. It would be quite so but for the fact that
this Grand Army is right, both by .nstinct and inspiration.

THE

W. C. T. U. rEllFETUAL.

525

Let us hope for the permanence of this great organization.
I believe it to be indestructible because it is the creation or
result of causes operating from the beginning of time, and
which in a true sense ordain whatsoever comes to pass, and
is a necessary means to the great end of millennial transformation.
The true history of our time is being made by woman.
It is her age. We are fortunate to live in it. Let the next,
which can look back upon their full proportions, record its
wonders. Meanwhile, let the actors in these great events
wait for the verdict of posterity, who
" Long shall seek tlieir likeness — long in vain."

,

WHAT

CHAPTER

XXV.

SHALL

DO

WE

NEXT?

Since Waterloo no Year in which E,um has not been the Great Destroyer
— Governor St. John's Speech at Worcester — The New Centuiy of
Temperance Reform — A Look Backward on the Past — Means of
the Past Successes — Helps and Hindrances — One Hundred Yeai's
have Wrought Conviction — The Removal of the Evil is now the
Problem — The Question Everywhere, North and South, East and
West — The American People must Act — What to do Next? —
Washingtonian Moral Suasion not Sufficient — Constitutional Amendment — Not of what Party, but will the Member of Congress Vote
Prohibitory Amendment? — In 1890 Submit the Amendment to the
People — No more Mistakes — Unanimity and Efficiency — Caucuses,
Primaries and Nominating Conventions — National Prohibition our
Watchword — Then, America the Temperance Leader and Redeemer
of the Nations.

we turn our faces to the foe and move for the promised hind, we feel the force of the question, — What
shall we do next? Let us briefly review the past and consider afew suggestions in answer to this question.
It must be conceded that the use of intoxicating, that is to
say of poisonous liquors as a beverage is the chief source
and immediate cause of more hurt to society and to individuals than any other agency which can be named. The
war of the rebellion cost us fewer lives and less treasure
AS

year by year during its term of death and devastation than
the nation has sacrificed annually to the Moloch of alcohol
during the halcyon period which has elapsed since its close.
Pestilence has not slain sixty thousand victims in any one
year since the settlement of this country. If cholera and
small-pox, combined, should sweep away one hundred thousand of our countrymen in a season, the nation would organize as one vast funeral procession and hang the heavens with
the emblems of despair. Famine is with us unknown, or at
least unnecessary, and whenever it exists it is a crime either
of the victim or of the community, and not an excusable misfortune in any case whatever ; but in other civilized lands
526

ALCOHOL

CONFRONTED

AS

THE

ENEMY.

527

starvation, even during the last fifty years, has occasionally
taught mankind that the terrible word can not yet be dropped
from the human vocabulary as descriptive of an evil liability
to which is extant among men.
Yet it may safely be said that since the battle of Waterloo, now the full period of the life of man, there has been no
one year in which the combined sufl'ering and pecuniary
losses inflicted upon the Caucasian race by war, pestilence
and famine, have equalled the total of destruction chargeable
to alcohol in the same lapse of time. Beyond this the curse
of the latter has been not intermittent and occasional, but
perpetual and inexorable, and, I think, on the whole, increas
ing like the everlasting and unyielding pressure of gravitation and depravity. In this work we have become familiar
with the mathematical statements which come to us from
statisticians, municipal authorities, from the leading luminaries of all the professions and from every source of authentic
information, by which we learn that at least two-thirds of
the pauperism, insanity and crime, and of the pul)lic and
private burdens which these great evils impose upon us, are
directly chargeable to intoxicating drink. Such facts are as
familiar as corpses upon a battlefield, and seem to attract no
more attention. I hazard nothing in appealing to the consciousness ofevery one who reads these lines to attest that
he has seen more of evil flowing from this than from any
other one cause during his whole lifetime, and I should
hardly fail if I asserted that the personal sorrows and afilictions which he has most to bewail among friends, kindred
and the community where he may dwell are traceable to
the same omnipresent curse. Those who preach, preach
against it, and those who pray, pray against it. Platform
orators denounce it. The press recounts its daily crimes
and deviltries, and those who drink, as well as those who
abstain, vie with each other in stigmatizing rum as the worst
thing there is extant. Yet, somehow, the old king does
most wonderfully hold his own. He is the popular curse.
He has round billions of money invested in his business,
one-tenth, perhaps, of the property and labor of the country,
producing and distributing death and misery to the American
people.
His market is as sure as that for cotton, corn or

528

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

beef. The unnatural appetite which constitutes the demand
has become as insatiable, and almost as universal, as the
demand for healthy foods. This appetite descends with the
blood, and the parent thus tends bar, even after death, for his
child. Multitudes bewail the evils of intoxication, attend
temperance meetings, sing temperance songs and pay a dollar a year to help along the blessed cause, and then lease
their real estate for saloons, protest against the insertion of
prohibition planks in political platforms lest remonstrance
against evil shall upset party supremacy ; or, it may be,
with upright purpose, influenced by profound discouragement
and disgust, they break down and destroy an organization
which they created and which belongs to them, which they
might control and save and use as a mighty power for the
removal of the evils which they deplore. So it goes, and the
evil expands until, as Governor St. John tells us, no doubt
truly, in a speech at Worcester, Mass., in the year 1885,
that the production, which in the year 1862 was said to have
been 16,000,000 gallons of distilled liquors, and 62,000,000
gallons of beer, perhaps an exceptionally unproductive year,
was, according to a recent report of the commissioner of
internal revenue, 69,000,000 gallons of distilled spirits,
19,000,000 barrels or 700,000,000 gallons of malt liquors,
and over 2,000,000 gallons of wine, all which went into the
consumption of this country during the fiscal year ending
June 30, 1885. Well, really, we do not seem to be progressing very rapidly according to these figures, but I suspect that the returns of 1862 were imperfect. There is,
however, I think, no doubt that the consumption of all kinds
of intoxicating liquors has increased quite as rapidly as
population in the United States during the last quarter of a
century. This is true of malt liquors, unquestionably, and
perhaps of wines. The rum traffic is now the great menacing
danger of America and of civilization.
What, then, shall we do ? I do not assume that I can
answer this question. I can state what seems to my vision
to be the better way ; that is all that any man can do, and
the Supreme Ruler of events will direct the pathway of
action for the new century and in the ages to come as he has
from the beofinnins: until now.

Mrs.
Cla7^a Hoffimin,
JPresidetit JF. C. T. U., of Missouri.

RETROSPECT

AND FORECAST.

529

We stand upon an elevation at the opening of a new
century of the temperance reform. It is an hour of retrospect and of forecast. Somethins; is revealed by the lamp of
experience for the guidance of our feet in the century to
come. What has been done in the last hundred years? By
what means has it been accomplished? What remains to
do, and by what means and methods shall the remaining
work be wrought? These questions are the all-important
ones before us now. They have largely been answered
already, and space forbids any save the most cursory view of
so vast a theme.
In the first place, during the century just closed we have
learned that the use of intoxicating liquors as a beverage,
simply as a beverage and not as a medicine, is an evil both
useless and hurtful. We have learned that alcohol is a
poison and not a food ; that it is never useful to the human
system save under circumstances when a })oison ma}- be
useful, never to i)r()duce or improve health only as it may
remove an obstruction to the n^itural and jiropcr action of
this vital machine, so fearfully and wonderfully made. AVe
gi-avely doubt whether it be ever useful or necessary. Science
has become our ally, and fortifies our cause impregnably with
her demonstrations. The Byronic phrase, "Rum and True
Religion," was hardly blasphemous sixty years ago. A venerable Christian once told me that when he was six years old,
his sainted mother became converted and joined the Congregational Church in (me of the best towns in my own State.
Among his most vivid recollections was the memorv of the
visits of the distinguished divine, who came, on two or more
occasions to his father's house, for the purpose of testing the
theological soundness as well as practical piety of his mother
during the probationary period which preceded her admission to the church, every such interview in the discharge of
his sacred calling being opened b>^ a liberal drink of New
England rum, administered by the hands of the candidate
for admission. It was not only the way of the world, but
it was the way of the church. Drinking which did not
result in actual helplessness was hardl}' considered an offense,
while, as to social custom, its indulgence was as universal
as it was deemed to be delisfhtful, and its danirerous tendencv
34

'

530

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

was overlooked most strangely and wickedly by the great
majority of the best of men. Now the Christian ministry,
Protestant and Catholic, is almost a unit against rum. The
medical profession is against rum ; the judiciary is against
rum : science, religion, the learned professions as a whole,
which one hundred years ago were for rum, are now against
it. The substantial press of the country is against it ; intelligence, conscience, all the great forces and agencies of
society are against it. Whenever and wherever any of
them advocate its cause, the work is accompanied by a
concession of the evil, and the hypocritical or ignorant pretense that it can best be suppressed by some policy which
increases the evil. You cannot conceive of a political platform which advocates or justifies the liquor traffic because it
does any good. All opposition to the evil is deprecated, or
its license is sought only upon the ground that stringent and
prohibitory measures increase the evil, or that such alleged
invasions of personal liberty are dangerous to individuals or
to the State. It seems to be forgotten that the very essence
of all government is an invasion of personal liberty to do
wrong, and there can be no personal liberty to perform any
action hurtful to society and to the State, which is beyond
the jurisdiction and the power of the government established
for the preservation of both. In short, this much (and it is
everything in that it is the major premise of the syllogism
whose conclusion is the destruction of the traffic), lias been
established by the agitation of the century just closed : that
the manufacture, sale and use of alcohol as a beverao;e is the
greatest crime and curse of modern times. All the great
conservative and preservative forces of society are now
arrayed against it. That means its ultimate and inevitable
extinction.
There never was an evil, which has passed away, that was
not destroyed by public opinion. There is not, there never
will be, an evil which can withstand the assaults of the
enlightened condemnation of a free people who suffer from
it. We have, then, this impregnable fact and supreme consolation which the past century has bequeathed to us, more
precious to humanity than a diadem of morning-stars, that
the liquor traffic is doomed, and shall be destroyed.
Th&

THE MEANS

OF PAST ACHIEVEMENTS.

531

demon has been tried, and condemned to death in the highest
court, the court of public opinion. To us is assigned the
work of execution. Let us proceed to perform that duty
faithful h^, relentlessly and noiu.
For a oioment let us consider the means by which the
achievements of the past have been won.
There seem to be two agencies which influence human
action, persuasion and force, — the action of individuals
upon each other and upon the community by facts and.
motives addressed to the understanding and to the will,
or, in other words, moral suasion ; and the will of the community— the result of moral suasion, embodied in law. The
law itself becomes, in its turn, the fortress and re-enforcement of the moral sentiment and opinion of the community ;
and by the sanctions which belong to its administration,
and the reverence which a free people must always entertain
for the laws which have once been enacted, even when the
reasons w^hich may have led to it have become forgotten
or obscured in the aoritation of fresh issues concerning the
pul)lic weal, the law preserves and maintains the good to
secure which it was enacted. After popular enthusiasm has
passed away, the enemy comes in again like a flood. Then
it is that a vigilant and determined minority can rally under
the segis of an existing: law, and summon its sanctions as a
means of recalling the former acutcness of a now blunted
public sentiment, as well as to directly suppress or restrain
the evil prohibited. True it is that when a law is really
wrong, or by the nature of things has become obsolete, the
reason thereof failing, it is impossible for a minority long to
enforce it. But, on the other hand, if the evil remain,
and the law be right, the fact that it is on the statute-l)ook
is a very great advantage, especially in times of declension
in public zeal for the right. Both these forces, moral suasion
and public law, have been employed in the promotion of the
temperance reform during the century past. It is so patent
that moral suasion, by education and argument, has been and
always must be the great preliminary, all-causing and controlling agency in moulding public opinion, which alone makes
laws and gives permanent efficiency after their enactment,
that for my present purpose I need not press its importance,

532

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

to the future as well as to the past, further upon the attention. Iwish to consider, however, briefly, the character of
the legal enactments which in the past have been relied upon
to promote the temperance reform. These have been by
license or by prohibition of the sale for immediate consumption, either by the State or by some subdivision of the State,
as a town or county, by authority derived from the State.
The general government has never passed, as it might do,
for the District of Columbia and the Territories any form
whatever of prohibitory law against the rum traffic. License
laws are based upon the idea of taxation for revenue, and
imply a sanction of the trade, as well as participation in
the profits thereof by the whole people, who, for the general
good alone, can exercise the taxing power. A license gives
the right to sell in consideration of the fee paid to the people,
and prohibits such right to those who will not pay the tax.
The same sum imposed as a penalty for selling in violation
of a prohibitory law, is payable for each and every sale, and
there is no consent to the act on the part of the public whatever. The fact that the penalty, like the fee for the license,
goes into the public treasury, is of no consequence at
all. These license laws, or excise laws, although for a
while they may restrain, are no ultimate help to the temperance reform. The}^ are, in fact, one of the chief defenses
of the traffic, and, whether high or low, are of most pernicious final tendency. They bribe the public conscience,
they bewilder the public intelligence, and they never are long
enforced in those provisions which are sometimes honestly,
but more generalh^ with bad design, attached for the apparent purpose of restriction. The licensee soon violates all
these restrictions, and then is as liable to prosecution, at the
instigation of the common seller without any license at all,
as is the latter at the suit of the licensee himself. One violator of law will not prosecute another violator of law. Then
where is the motive for prosecution on his part, the creation
of which is said to be the great excellence of the license law
as a means of regulating the trade? It has disappeared, and
the license law is no law^ at all in its practical effisct, save only
as it does the general coffers fill with the price of blood. So
far as it promotes the gilded saloon by closing the low grog-"^

Mother Stewart.

PAST

ACHIEVEMENTS

AND

FAILURES.

533

gery, I have only to say, the latter seems to me to be far
more respectable, and a less curse in the community than
the former. Ten groggeries will not work the ruin wrought
by a single palace of strong drink. Treason should be made
odious. Every lover of his country should vote for the
groggery as against the saloon. The license law, high or
low, is no device of the temperance reform nor of the temperance agitation. It was not developed by it. The moral
sentiment of the community had nothing to do with its
origin, nor, unless under a grievous misapprehension, with
its present support. It has existed ever since there Avas a
traffic, and for the sole purpose of getting money out of it
for the public pocket, and might just as well be applied to
the commission of any other oftense against the public welfare by those who would pay for the liberty, as to the trade
in rum. A license law seems to me to be radicallv wronoin principle, pernicious in practice, and, so far as I know,
no one has ever imposed any real or permanent restraint
upon the gigantic evil with which civilization is now called
upon to contend. The only permanent good effect of such
a law is to undeceive the confidence of the enemies of the
traffic in the efficacy of such devices. Some people will
only learn from an experiment.
There remain to be considered only the State and local
option laws, which have assumed to prohil)it the sale of
alcohol for drinking purposes. The amendments to State
constitutions have as yet become hardly an operative force.
These prohibitory laws have partiall}^ succeeded and they
have partially failed. Why have they so far succeeded?
Because they were founded upon the right principle, and
hence rallied conscience and humanity to their support.
Why have they so far failed? Because they were, save in
the principle involved, in no just sense prohil)itorv laws at
all. They did not, and they do not, and they can not, Avhen
enacted by a State only, prevent the traffic in intoxicating
liquor. The liquor traffic comprises vastly more than the
retail sale, or even the wholesale and retail transaction.
The liquor traffic is practically independent, in a large
degree, of any State, and in an absolute degree of most of
the States.
True, if the drinking habit were not so power-

534

THE

TEMPERANCE

^MOVEMENT.

ful and universal, it might be somewhat different. But now
every little hamlet and almost every house sends forth its
cry and holds out its money to the whole land and to the
whole earth, bes^o-ino- for strono; drink. It can be made
everywhere, and, under the protection of the armies and
navies of the nation, and of the world if it come from beyond
the seas, alcohol, in the original packages, can be rolled into
the cellar of every cabin as well as every palace in the country. But how inadequate and what a misnomer is any such
thing as a prohibitory law which can only forbid the sale to
the consumer in a State ! and how much more so one which
is operative only for the same purpose in a county or town !
Even the State constitutional amendments, which prohibit
the manufacture as well as the sale, must fail — inevitably
fail. In the very nature of things, there is and there can be
no remedy but in a national constitutional prohibitory law.
It will be time enough to cry that prohibition does not prohibit when prohibition has been tried. The State of Maine
has very greatly improved the condition of her people by
the operation of her quasi-prohibitory law ; so of New Hampshire and Vermont. Ask any old resident of any one of
these States and he will tell you, yea. A politician with a
flask in his pocket or a liquor drummer from Boston might
bewail the failure of the prohibitory law in those States, but
I consider these laws, imperfect as they are in all save
their motive, in their practical operation miracles of good ;
and, considering the existing appetite, — which antedated
the law and the existence of which was the cause of the
attempted reform, — the enormous and concentrated capital
and action protected by nearly all State and the overwhelming power of national law which makes the stuff anywhere and carries it everywhere, I say deliberately that not
even the law against murder is any better enforced than
these poor, halting paragraphs of infantile legislation, nicknamed prohibitory laws. A truly prohibitory law must have
jurisdiction of the evil, and of its physical causes from their
origin to their end. The nation alone can assert that full
jurisdiction and exercise the necessary power.
We have been one hundred years convincing science, religion, the professions, the judges who administer the crim-'

WASHINGTOXIAN

MORAL

SUASION

INSUFFICIENT.

535

inal laws, and the great mass of the people, that alcohol is
poison, and that its manufacture, sale and use is the organized destruction of individuals and the body-politic. The
nature of the legislation which is to remove and renovate all
is now to be considered and enacted and enforced. Whoever believes that the destruction of the liquor traffic is not
a national issue has made a mistake. Whoever does not
comprehend that the removal of that evil is a duty, which
the nation is about to perform, fails to discern the signs of
the times. Everywhere the question is up. In the North
and in the South ; in Massachusetts, New York and Ohio ;
throughout the West and the South-west ; in every State the
agitation is irrepressible, because the evil is gigantic and
omnipresent. It is impossible to suppress these convulsive
efforts of the social system to free itself of this foreign and
destructive element. It must be eliminated or society will
die. It is of no use to cry peace, for there is no peace.
Peace without a complete cure would l)e the most dangerous
symptom. It would indicate the destruction of vital })()wer,
presaging decline and death.
The American people must do something.
What had Ave best do next?
The Washingtonian movement swept over the country, some
fifty years ago, like a tidal wave from the sea of life. That
movement was moral suasion in its most powerful manifestation. The great wave subsided, and the enemy came in
once more like a flood of fire, and there be those who believe
that the last state was worse than the first. Was, then, the
Washingtonian movement wrong? Nay, verily, but it was
incomplete. The tremendous public opinion which the discussion evoked should have been crystallized into the enduring forms of State and national law. The triumph then
would have been complete and the work secure. We have
at last learned something ; and we are still learning more and
more, that it is what we save that makes us rich. Deposit
all the savings of reform in the solid banks of constitutional
and statutory legislation. State and national, and the liquor
traffic will not pauperize this generation of laborers in the
field of temperance reform. We shall have a most precious
inheritance to leave to the s^eneration which comes after us.

f»36

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

We shall not repeat the mistake of our fathers. Whatever we
advance we shall hold by the authority of law. The one allessential thing remaining to be done is to put forth every effort
to secure political action. State political action is important,
but national politicid action is all-important. I have endeavored to indicate why it is indispensable, and the only action
which can render that of the States either permanent or
efficient. If either should wait for the other, by all means
let the States wait on the nation ; let all the people of all the
States concentrate upon one grand effort to amend the
national constitution, so as to prohibit the manufacture, the
sale, the importation, the exportation and the transportation
of alcoholic beverages anywhere within the limits of the
national domain. That is the w^ay to rescue and preserve
the States. It is easy thus to create the popular sentiment
which must exist within the States in order that legislation
may be secured in their several jurisdictions. The evil is
national, and the war which saves the nation must be fought
by the nation. The constitution, now the charter of the
rum power, is to be amended by securing a two-thirds vote
of both houses of Congress, submitting a proposition for that
purpose to the States for their action, and its approval by
three-fourths of the entire number of the States. The President has nothing to do with the submission of the proposed
amendment to the States, because he legislates only by veto,
which is nullitied by a two-thirds vote of the two houses, and
a two-thirds vote must be secured in its favor in the first
place. Between the submission to the States and ratification
by three-fourths of the States, a considerable period might,
undoubtedly Avould, elapse, but we should succeed in the
end. All the energy of the reform throughout the nation
could be concentrated upon the States one after another, and
I sincerely believe that, once before the people, we can complete the work in five years time. Nationally, little comparatively important, can be done now but to get two-thirds
of both houses of Congress to vote to submit the proposed
amendment to the people. It is nothing to us whether a
senator or a representative be a Democrat or a Republican, a
Prohibitory party man or a Labor man, whether he is for
license or prohibition, provided he will vote to take the

Mrs, y. K, Barney,
of Rhode Islatid.

THE

PROHIBITORY

AMEND31ENT

IN

1890.

537

sense of the people upon such a proposed amendment. Tliat
is what we want of him now. Only this and nothing more.
What honest man can say that this request is unreasonable ?
What political l^arty which cares for political freedom can
deny to the millions who desire to be heard upon this tremendous question of the amendment of the constitution of
the country, so as to preserve the existence of our nation and
of our civilization before the only tribunal which can decide
it, the exercise of this fundamental right ? We ask no man
or party now to pledge himself to advocate the amendment
before the people ; we will take care of that when we get to
the people. But we demand tliat he shall give to us and that
political parties shall give to us a chance to be heard in the
proper forum — the forum of the people — which is our
right. It is our concern, not his or theirs, whether we are
defeated or not when we reach the people of the several
States. This is the temperance issue now rising in this
whole land, and, until this is decided, no party, man or fac
tion can project one of comparatively serious importance
into national politics. There is temperance sentiment
enough to choose a two-thirds vote in favor of submitting
such an amendment to the people in the very next House of
Representatives, provided it would go into the primaries and
the conventions of political parties now existing, and then
support in good faith at the polls the man who should have
been pledged to submit the amendment to the people of the
States. The Senate would surely vote immediately with the
House upon this proposition. This amendment might be
thus submitted to the people in 1890, and the amendment
itself become a part of the law of the land before the close of
the century.
Oh, fools and blind ! Can we not discern the signs of the
times ?
No more mistakes should be made. The working people
of this country are with us, and the whole temperance vote
should combine for the submission of such an amendment.
Control the primaries and nominating conventions. They
are the hiding-places of political power. This ought not to
be a party question ; there should be unanimity in a matter
like this, but I fear we can not hope so much as this for

538

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

our country. It would be the millennium. But let us try.
Some party will adopt the issue and in this sign conquer.
I have thus endeavored to answer the question, what had
better next be done in the temperance reform. Every man,
woman and child is interested in the answer ; future generations depend upon that answer for their destiny of weal or of
woe. Without undervaluing local and State agitation and
legislation, let us concentrate every energy and effort upon
the one great work of securing the submission of a proposed
national amendment to the people of the States. Then we
shall have before us a period of agitation in the States for its
ratification there. Thus we shall have regenerated the constitution, and the tremendous powers of the nation will soon
throttle this Giant Despair, who is feeding by day and by
night upon the bodies and souls of Qur countrymen. Let us
wisely conserve our forces and our votes. Peaceful agencies,
if wisely employed, will accomplish the grand result. Numerous issues, essential to the public welfare, are always
pending, and great parties which are entrusted vvdth national
control mast embrace and simultaneously deal with them all
or perish, for they have no right to exist after they decline
or fail to promote the public good.
Each man must decide for himself the method of his action.
Let us, however, at least concentrate upon the things to be
done, that the tremendous forces now dissipated in the sand
may become a mighty torrent of beneficence and sweep away
the nation's curse. Abating no whit of effort in the way of
instruction or persuasion, increasing the activity of all the
agencies now employed to influence individual municipal
organizations and States, let us lift up the mighty banner of
National Constitutional Prohibition. Let us ourselves contemplate the subject from this higher elevation.
The nation refuses to permit the importation of criminals
— then let us prohibit the importation of the cause of crirtiinals and of crimes. We refuse to receive the paupers and
outcasts of surrounding nations — then let us repel from our
borders the primal source of poverty, wretchedness and
despair. What we refuse to receive from abroad shall we
continue to manufacture and export? What we refuse, or
ought to refuse to import or export, because of its malignant

THE

CAUCUS,

THE

PEIMAEY,

THE

CONVENTION.

539

and destructive work, shall we as a nation continue to manufacture, distribute and consume among ourselves? Shall we
longer divide and destroy the result of our most zealous
efforts among the people and in the States by permitting the
national constitution and national power, within their sphere
the supreme law of the land, to protect the manufacture, the
distribution and the wholesale trade in this merchandise of
death? Nay, verily, if the new century is to complete the
temperance reform there is but one way to accomplish it —
National Prohibition must be our watchword.
Let this issue be carried into every caucus and primary for
choice of delegates, and into every congressional convention
of every party at the next election and every election ; and
let every voter make this issue one of the great tests of party
fealty. Let the same issue be made in the caucuses which
nominate the Legislatures who make senators of the United
States, and thus choose members of both Houses of Congress who will demand for the people whom they represent,
the opportunity to l)e heard in the forum of the States for
the amendment and regeneration of the constitution of the
country, so that this sacred instrument shall become the warrant for the destruction, and no longer the charter of life and
liberty to the most terrible curse and crime of civilization.
This seems to me to be what we had better do next. The
first great national step taken, the amendment to the national
constitution submitted, the amendment ratified by threefourths of the States, the general government clothed with
jurisdiction to prohibit the manufacture, sale, importation,
exportation and transportation of intoxicating drinks to be
used as a beverage, legislation to that end placed upon the
statute-book of the land, both State and national authorities
harmoniously combining for the destruction of the traffic,
public sentiment awakened everywhere by this broad and
universal agitation, fused and consolidated and hurled by the
arm of the whole people, will strike with the unity and
power of the thunderbolt ; and, when the deafening crash
and blinding glare and sulphurous smoke and smell have
passed away, we or our children shall behold King Alcohol
prone and dead in his own gutter — slain by the lightnings
of God.

540

THE

TEMPERANCE

MOVEMENT.

But there is one thing more that must be done. We must
not be satisfied with our own redemption. Our nation must
become an active agency in the great family of nations, for
the destruction of the traffic throughout the world.
The business must be placed in the process of ultimate extinction everywhere. One nation in earnest can set all the
needed machinery in motion. Let us build our navy, outlaw
the liquor traffic, declare it piracy when conducted on the
high seas, and suppress it with shot and shell. It is worse
than the trade in slaves. Capture or sink every ship that
carries the contraband article, and give it to the waves. No
nation will long contend for this traffic against the sincere
and aggressive action of the American people. Nearly or
quite every Christian nation would, after a brief period of
agitation, join in a general international declaration against
the trade and for its suppression. Whatever the world will
not tolerate on the high seas, or as an article of international
exchange, will soon cease to be tolerated within the home
jurisdiction of the separate nations which make up the whole.
Let America take her position. Ah ! if we only were in
possession of our own government ! If we were only in
earnest ourselves ! Then, what might we not do next?

APPENDIX,

DECISION

THE

KANSAS

OF THE

SUPREME

CASES.

COURT

OF THE

UNITED

STATES.

Nos. 19, 20, aud 934.— October Term, 1887.

Peter Mugler, Plaintiflf in Kiror,
vs.
The State of Kansas.

In error to the Supreme
Court of the State of
Kansas.

Petei- Mugler, Plaintiff in Error,
vs.
The State of Kansas.

In error to the Supreme
Court of the State of
Kansas.

The State of Kansas, ex rel. J. F. Tufts.
Assistant Attorney-General of the State
of Kansas for Atchison County, KanApi)eal
fromof the
the UnitCii"enit Court
sas, Api)ellant.
Jed States for the Disvs.
I
trict of Kansas.
Herman
ZieboM
and Joseph Hageliu, '
partners as Ziebold & Hagelin.
J
{Decemher 5th, 1887.]
Mr. Justice Harlan delivered the opinion of the Court.
These cases involve an inquiiy into the validity of certain statutes of Kansas relating to the manufacture aud ^ale of intoxicating liquors.
The first two are indictments, charging Mugler. the plaintiff in
error, in one case, with having sold, and in the other, with iiaving
manufnctnred, spirituous, vinous, malt, fermented, and other intoxicating liquors, in Saline County. Kansas, without having the license

542

APPENDIX.

or permit required by the statute. The defendant, having been
found guilty, was fined, in each case, one hundred dollars, and
ordered to be committed to the county jail until the fine was paid.
Each judgment was affirmed by the Supreme Court of Kansas, and
thereby, it is contended, the defendant was denied rights, privileges, and immunities guaranteed by the Constitution of the United
States.
The third case — Kansas v. Ziebold & Hagelin — was commenced
by petition filed in one of the courts of the State. The relief sought
is: 1. That the group of buildings in Atchison County, Kansas,
constituting the brewery of the defendants, partners as Ziebold &
Hagelin, be adjudged a common

nuisance, and the sheriff or other

proper officer directed to shut up and abate the same.

2. That the

defendants be enjoined from using, or permitting to be used, the
said premises as a place where intoxicating liquors may be sold,
bartered, or given away, or kept for barter, sale, or gift, otherwise
than by authority of law.
The defendants answered, denying the allegations of the petition,
and averring : First. That said buildings were erected by them
prior to the adoption, by the people of Kansas, of the constitutional amendment prohibiting the manufacture and sale of intoxicatingHonors for other than medicinal, scientific, and mechanical purposes,
and before the passage of the prohibitory liquor statute of that
State. Second. That they were erected for the purpose of manufacturing beer, and cannot be put to any other use ; and, if not so
used, they will be of little value. Third. That the statute under
which said suit is brought is void under the Fourteenth Amendment
of the Constitution of the United States.
Upon the petition and bond of the defendants the cause was removed into the Circuit Court of the United States for the District
of Kansas upon the ground that the suit was one arising under the
Constitution of the United States. A motion to remand it to the
State court was denied. The pleadings were recast so as to conform
to the equity practice in the courts of the United States ; and, the
cause having been heard upon bill and answer, the suit was dismissed. From that decree the State prosecutes an appeal.
By a statute of Kansas, approved March 3, 1868, it was made a

APPENDIX.

543

misdemeador, punishable by fine and imprisonment, for any one,
directly or indirectly, to sell spirituous, vinous, fermented, or other
intoxicating liquors, without having a dram-shop, tavern, or grocery
license. It was, also, enacted, among other things, that every
place where intoxicating liquors were sold in violation of the statute should be taken, held, and deemed to be a common nuisance ;
and it was required that all rooms, taverns, eating-houses, bazaars,
restaurants, groceries, coffee-houses, cellars, or other places of
public resort where intoxicating liquors were sold, in violation of
law, should be abated as public nuisances. Gen. Stat. Kansas,
1868, ch. 35.
But, in 1880, the people of Kansas adopted a more stringent
policy. On the 2d of November

of that year, they ratified an

amendment to the State constitution, which declared that the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors should be forever prohibited in that State, except for medical, scientific, and mechanical
purposes.
In order to give effect to that amendment, the legislature repealed the act of 1868, and passed an act, approved February 19, 1881,
to take effect May 1, 1881, entitled " An act to prohibit the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors, except for medical, scientific, and mechanical purposes, and to regulate the manufacture
and sale thereof for such excepted purposes." Its first section
provides " that any person or persons who shall manufacture, sell,
or barter any spirituous, malt, vinous, fermented, or other intoxicating liquors shall be guilty of a misdemeanor : Provided, hoivever,
That such liquors may be sold for medical, scientific, and mechanical purposes, as provided in this act." The second section makes
it unlawful for any person to sell or barter for either of such excepted purposes any malt, vinous, spirituous, fermented, or other
intoxicating liquors without having procured a druggist's permit
therefor, and prescribes the conditions upon which such permit may
be gi-anted. The third section relates to the giving by physicians
of prescriptions for intoxicating liquors to be used by their patients and
;
the fonrth, to the sale of such liquors by druggists.
The fifth section forbids any person from manufacturing or assisting in the manufacture of intoxicating liquors in the State, except

544

APPENDIX.

for medical, scientific, and mechanical purposes, and makes provision for the granting of licenses to engage in the business of manufactm-ing liquors for such excepted purposes. The seventh section
declares it to be a misdemeanor for any person, not having the required permit, to sell or barter, directly or indirectly, spirituous, malt,
vinous, fermented, or other intoxicating liquors ; the punishment
prescribed being, for the first offence, a fine of not less than one
hundred nor more than five hundred dollars, or imprisonment in
the county jail not less than twenty nor more than ninety days ; for
the second offence, a fine of not less than two hundred nor more than
than five hundred dollars, or imprisonment in the county jail not less
than sixty days nor more than six months ; and for every subsequent
offence, a fine not less than five hundred nor more than one thousand
dollars, or imprisnoment in the county jail not less than three months
nor more than one year, or both such fine and imprisonment, in
the discretion of the court. The eighth section provides for similar fines and punishments against persons who manufacture, or aid,
assist, or abet the manufacture of any intoxicating liquors without
having the required permit. The tliirteenth section declares, among
other things, all places where intoxicating liquors are manufactured,
sold, bartered, or given away, or are kept for sale, barter, or use,
in violation of the act, to be common nuisances ; and provides that
upon the judgment of any court having jurisdiction finding such
place to be a nuisance, the proper officer shall be directed to shut
I up and abate the same.
Under that statute, the prosecutions against Mugler were instituted. It contains other sections in addition to those above referred
to ; but as they embody merely the details of the general scheme
adopted b}' the State for the prohibition of the manufacture and
sale of intoxicating liquors, except for the purposes specified, it is
unnecessary to set them out.
On the 7th of March, 1885, the legislature passed an act amendatory and supplementary to that of 1881. The thirteenth section of
the former act, being the one upon which the suit against Ziebold
& Hagelin is founded, will be given in full in a subsequent part of
this opinion.
The facts necessary to a clear understanding of the questions,

APPENDIX.

545

common to these cases, are the following : Mugler and Ziebold &
Hagelin were engaged in manufacturing beer at their respective establishments, (constructed specially for that purpose) for several
years prior to the adoption of the constitutional amendment of
1880. They continued in such business in defiance of the statute
of 1881, and without having the required permit. Nor did Mugler
have a license or permit to sell beer. The single sale of which he
was found guilty occurred in the State, and after May 1, 1881, that
is, after the act of February 19, 1881, took effect, and was of beer
manufactured before its passage.
The buildings and machinery constituting these breweries are of
little value if not used for the purpose of manufacturing beer ;
that is to say, if the statutes are enforced against the defendants
the value of their property will be very materially diminished.
The general question in each case is, whether the foregoing statutes of Kansas are in conflict with that clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment, which provides that " no State shall make or enforce
any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens
of the United States ; nor shall any State deprive any person of
life, liberty, or property, without due process of law."
That legislation by a State prohibiting the manufacture within
her limits of intoxicating liquors, to be there sold or bartered for
general use as a beverage, does not necessarily infringe any right,
privilege, or immunity secured by the Constitution of the United
States, is made clear by the decisions of this court, rendered before
and since the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment ; to some of
which, in view of questions to be presently considered, it will be
well to refer.
In the License Cases, 5 JEfmo. 504, the question was, whether certain statutes of Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire,
relating to the sale of spirituous liquors were repugnant to the Constitution ofthe United States. In determining that question, it became necessary to inquire whether there was any conflict between
the exercise by Congress of its power to regulate commerce with
foreign countries, or among the several States, and the exercise by
a State of what are called police powers. Although the members
of the court did not fully agree as to the grounds upon which the

35

546

APPENDIX.

decision should be placed, they were unanimous in holding that the
statutes then under examination were not inconsistent with the
Constitution of the United States, or with any act of Congress.
Chief Justice Taney said : "If any State deems the retail and internal traffic in ardent spirits injurious to its citizens, and calculated to produce idleness, vice, or debauchery, I see nothing in the
Constitution of the United States to prevent it from regulating and
restraining the traffic, or from prohibiting it altogether, if it thinks
proper." Mr. Justice McLean, among other things, said: "A
State regulates its domestic commerce, contracts, the transmission
of estates, real and personal, and acts upon internal matters which
relate to its moral and political welfare. Over these subjects the
Federal government has no power.

. . The acknowledged police

power of a State extends often to the destruction of property. A
nuisance may be abated. Everything prejudicial to the health or
morals of a city may be removed." Mr. Justice Woodbury observed : " How can they [the States] be sovereign within their respective spheres, without power to regulate all their internal commerce,
as well as police, and direct how, when and where it shall be conducted in articles intimately connected either with public morals or
public safety or public prosperity ? " Mr. Justice Grieb, in still more
emphatic language, said: "The true question presented by these
cases, and one which I am not disposed to evade, is whether the
States have a right to prohibit the sale and consumption of an article of commerce which they believe to be pernicious in its effects,
and the cause of disease, pauperism, and crime. . . Without
attempting to define what are the peculiar subjects or limits of this
power, it may safely be affirmed, that every law for the restraint
or punishment of crime, for the preservation of the public peace,
health and morals must come within this category. . . It is not
necessary, for the sake of justifying the State legislation now under
consideration, to array the appalling statistics of misery, pauperism and crime which have their origin in the use or abuse of ardent
spirits. The police power, which is exclusively in the States, is
alone competent to the correction of these great evils, and all
measures of restraint or prohibition necessary to effect the purpose
are within the scope of that authority."

'APPENDIX.

547

In Bartemeyer v. Iowa, 18 Wall. 129, it was said that prior to
the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment,

State enactments,

regulating or prohibiting the traffic in intoxicating liquors, raised no
question under the Constitution of the United States ; and that
such legislation Avas left to the discretion of the respective States,
subject to no other limitations than those imposed by their own constitutions, orby the general principles supposed to limit all legislative power. Referring to the contention that the right to sell intoxicating liquors was secured by the Fourteenth Amendment, the
court said that " so far as such a right exists, it is not one of the
rights growing out of citizenship of the United States." In Beer
Co. V. Massachusetts, 97 U. S. 33, it was said, that, " as a measure
of police regulation, looking to the preservation of public morals,
a State law prohibiting tlie manufacture and sale of intoxicating
liquors is not repugnant to any clause of the Constitution of the
United States." Finally, in Foster v. Ka7isas, 112 U. S. 206, the
court said that the question as to the constitutional power of a
State to prohibit the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors
was no longer an open one in this court. These cases rest upon
the acknowledged right of the States of the Union to control their
purely internal affairs, and, in so doing, to protect the health,
morals, and safety of their people by regulations that do not interfere with the execution of the powers of the general government,
or violate rights secured by the Constitution of the United States.
The power to establish such regulations, as was said in Gibbons v.
Ogden, 9 Wheat. 203, reaches everything within the territory of a
State not surrendered to the national government.
It is, however, contended, that, although the State may prohibit
the manufacture of intoxicating liquors for sale or barter within her
limits, for general use as a beverage, " no convention or legislature
has the right, under our form of government, to prohibit any citizen from manufacturing for his own use, or for export, or storage,
any article of food or drink not endangering or affecting the rights
of others." The argument made in support of the first branch of
this proposition, briefly stated, is, that in the implied compact between the State and the citizen certain rights are reserved by the
latter, which are guaranteed by the constitutional provision protect-

548

APPENDIX.

ing persons against being deprived of life, liberty, or property,
without due process of law, and with which the State cannot interfere ;that among those rights is that of manufacturing for one's
use either food or drink ; and that while, according to the doctrines
of the Commune,

the State may control the tastes, appetites,

habits, dress, food, and drink of the people, our system of government, based upon the individuality and intelligence of the citizen,
does not claim to control him, except as to his conduct to others,
leaving him the sole judge as to all that only affects himself.
It will be observed that the proposition, and the argument made
in support of it, equally concede that the right to manufacture
drink for one's personal use is subject to the condition that such
manufacture does not endanger or affect the rights of others. If
such manufacture does prejudicially affect the right and interests of
the community, it follows, from the very premises stated, that society has the power to protect itself, by legislation, against the injurious consequences of that business. As was said in Munn v.
Illinois, 94 U. S. 124, while power does not exist with the whole
people to control rights that are purely and exclusively pi'ivate,
government may require " each citizen to so conduct himself, and
so use his own property, as not unnecessarily to injure another."
But by whom, or by what authority, is it to be determined
whether the manufacture of particular articles of drink, either for
general use or for the personal use of the maker, will injuriously
affect the public? Power to determine such questions, so as to
bind all, must exist somewhere ; else society will be at the mercy
of the few, who, regarding only their own appetites or passions,
may be willing to imperil the peace and security of the many, provided only they are permitted to do as they please. Under our system that power is lodged with the legislative branch of the government. It belongs to that department to exert what are known as
the police powers of the State, and to determine, primarily, what
measures are appropriate or needful for the protection of the public morals, the public health, or the public safety.
It does not at all follow that every statute enacted ostensibly for
the promotion of these ends, is to be accepted as a legitimate exercise of the police powers of the State.
There are, of necessity,

APPENDIX.

549

limits beyond which legislation cannot rightfully go. "While every
possible presumption is to be indulged in favor of the validity of a
statute, {^Sinking Fund Cases, 99 U. S. 718,) the courts must obey
the Constitution rather than the law-making department of government, and must, upon their own responsibilit}', determine whether,
in any particular case, these limits have been passed. "'■ To what
purpose," it was said in Marhury v. Madison, 1 Cranch, 137, 1G7,
" are powers limited, and to what purpose is that limitation committed to writing, if these limits may, at any time, be passed by those
intended to be restrained ? The distinction between a government
with limited and unlimited powers is abolished, if those limits do
not confine the persons on whom

they are imposed, and if acts

prohibited and acts allowed are of equal obligation." The courts
are not bound by mere forms, nor are they to be misled by mere
pretenses. They are at liberty — indeed, are under a solemn duty —
to look at the substance of things, whenever they enter upon the
inquiry whether the legislature has transcended the limits of its
authority. If, therefore, a statute purporting to have been enacted to protect the public health, the public morals, or the public
safety, has no real or substantial relation to those objects, or is a
palpable invasion of rights secured by the fundamental law, it is
the duty of the courts to so adjudge, and thereby give effect to the
Constitution.
Keeping in view these principles, as governing the relations of
the judicial and legislative departments of government with each
other, it is diflicult to perceive any ground for the judiciary to declare that the prohibition hy Kansas of the manufacture or sale,
within her limits, of intoxicating liquors for general use there as a
beverage, is not fairly adapted to the end of protecting the community against the evils which confessedly result from the excessive use of ardent spii'its. There is no justification for holding
that the State, under the guise merely of police regulations, is here
aiming to deprive the citizen of his constitutional rights ; for we
cannot shut out of view the fact, within the knowledge of all, that
the public health, the public morals, and the public safet}', may be
endangered by the general use of intoxicating drinks ; nor the
fact, established by statistics accessible to every one, that the idle-

550

APPENDIX.

ness, disorder, pauperism, and crime existing in the country are,
in some degree at least, traceable to this evil. If, therefore, a
State deems the absolute prohibition of the manufacture and sale,
within her limits, of intoxicating liquors for other than medical,
scientific, and manufacturing purposes, to be necessary to the peace
and security of society, the courts cannot, without usurping legislative functions, override the will of the people as thus expressed by
their chosen representatives. They have nothing to do with the
mere policy of legislation. Indeed, it is a fundamental principle in
our institutions, indispensable to the preservation of public liberty,
that one of the separate departments of government shall not usurp
powers committed by the Constitution to another department. And
so, if in the judgment of the legislature, the manufacture of intoxicating liquors for the maker's own use, as a beverage, would tend
to cripple, if it did not defeat, the effort to guard the community
against the evils attending the excessive use of such liquors, it is
not for the courts, upon their views as to what is best and safest
for the community, to disregard the legislative determination of
that question. So far from such a regulation having no relation to
the general end sought to be accomplished, the entire scheme of
prohibition, as embodied in the constitution and laws of Kansas,
might fail, if the right of each citizen to manufacture intoxicating
liquors for his own use as a beverage were recognized. Such a
right does not inhere in citizenship. Nor can it be said that government interferes with or impairs any one's constitutional rights of
liberty or of property, when it determines that the manufacture and
sale of intoxicating drinks, for general or individual use, as a beverage, are, or may become, hurtful to society, and constitute, therefore, a business in which no one may lawfully engage. Those
rights are best secured, in our government, by the observance, upon
the part of all, of such regulations as are established by competent
authority to promote the common

good. No one may rightfully do

that which the law-making power, upon reasonable grounds, declares to be prejudicial to the general welfare.
This conclusion is unavoidable, unless the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution takes from the States of the Uuion those
powers of police that were reserved at the time the original Consti-

APPENDIX.

551

tution was adopted. But this court has declared, upon full consideration, in Barbiery. Connolly^ 113 U. S. 31, that the Fourteenth
Amendment

had no such effect. After observing, among other

things, that that amendment

forbade the arbitrary deprivation of

life or liberty, and the arbitrary spoliation of property, and secured equal protection to all under like circumstances, in respect as
well to their personal and civil rights as to their acquisition and
enjoyment of property, the court said: "But neither the amendment— broad and comprehensive as it is — nor any other amendment,
was designed to interfere with the power of the State, sometimes
termed its police power, to prescribe regulations to promote the
health, peace, morals, education, and good order of the people, and
to legislate so as to increase the industries of the State, develop its
resources, and add to its wealth and prosperity."
Undoubtedly the State, when providing, by legislation, for the
protection of the public health, the public morals, or the public
safety, is subject to the paramount authority of the Constitution of
the United States, and may not violate rights secured or guaranteed
by that instrument, or interfere with the execution of the powers
confided to the general government. Henderson v. Mayor of New
York, 92 U. S. 259 ; Railroad Co. v. Husen, 95 Id. 465 ; New Orleans Gas Light Co. v. Louisiana lAght Co., 115 Id. 650 ; Walling
V. Michigan, 116 Id. 446 ; Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 Id. 356 ; Morgan's Steamship Co. v. Louisiana, Board of Health, Id. 455.
Upon this ground — if we do not misapprehend the position of
defendants — it is contended that, as the primary and principal use
of beer is as a beverage ; as their respective breweries were erected
when it was lawful to engage in the manufacture of beer for every
purpose ; as such establishments will become of no value as property, or, at least, will be materially diminished in value, if not
employed in the manufacture of beer for every purpose ; the prohibition upon their being so employed is, in effect, a taking of
property for public use without compensation, and depriving the
citizen of his property without due process of law. In other words,
although the State, in the exercise of her police powers, may lawfully prohibit the manufacture and sale, within her limits, of intoxicating liquors to be used as a beverage, legislation having that

552

APPENDIX.

object in view cannot be enforced against those who, at the time,
happen to own property, the chief value of which consists in its fitness for such manufacturing purposes, unless compensation is first
made for the diminution in the value of their property, resulting
from such prohibitory enactments.
This interpretation of the Fourteenth Amendment

is inadmissible.

It cannot be supposed that the State imtended, by adopting that
amendment, to impose restraints upon the exercise of their powers
for the protection of the safety, health, or morals of the community. In respect to contracts, the obligations of which are protected
against hostile State legislation, this court in Butchers'
Union Co.
V. Crescent City Co., Ill U. S. 751, said that the State could not,
by any contract, limit the exercise of her power to the prejudice of
the public health and the public morals.
So, in Stone v. Mississippi., 101 U. S. 816, where the Constitution was invoked against the
repeal by the State of a charter, granted to a private corporation,
to conduct a lottery, and for which that corporation paid to the
State a valuable consideration in money, the court said : " No legislature can bargain away the public health or the public morals.
The people themselves cannot do it, much less their servants.
Government is organized with a view to their preservation, and cannot divest itself of the power to provide for them."
Again, in New
Orleans Gas Co. v. Louisiana Light Co., 115U. S. 650, 672 : " The
constitutional prohibition upon State laws impairing the obligation of
contracts does not restrict the power of the State to protect
the public health,

the

public

morals, or the

public

safety,

as

the one or the other may be involved in the execution of such
contracts.

Rights

and privileges arising from contracts with a

State are subject to regulations for the protection of the public
health, the public morals, and the public safety, in the same sense,
and to the same extent, as are all contracts and all property,
whether owned by natural persons or corporations."
The principle, that no person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or
property, without due process of law, was embodied, in substance,
in the constitutions of nearly all, if not all, of the States at the
time of the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment ; and it has
never

been regarded as incompatible with the principle equally

APPENDIX.

553

vital, because essential to the peace and safety of society, that aU.
property in this country is held under the implied obligation that the
owner's use of it shall not be injurious to the community. Beer Co. v.
Massachusetts, 97 U. S. 32; Commonwealth \ . Alger, 7 Cush. 53.
An illustration of this doctrine is afforded by Patterson v. Kentucky^
97 U. S. 501. The question there was as to the validity of a statute
of Kentucky, enacted in 1874, imposing a penalty upon any one
selling or offering for sale oils and fluids, the product of coal, petroleum, or other bituminous substances, which would burn or ignite
at a temperature below 130° Fahrenheit. Patterson having sold,
within that commonwealth, a certain oil, for which letters-patent
were issued in 1867, but which did not come up to the standard required bysaid statute, and having been indicted therefor, disputed
the State's authority to prevent or obstruct the exercise of that right.
This court upheld the legislation of Kentucky, upon the ground, that
while the State could not impair the exclusive right of the patentee,
or of his assignee, in the discovery described in the letters-patent,
the tangible property, the fruit of the discovery, was not beyond
control in the exercise of her police powers. It was said : " By
the settled doctrines of this court the police power extends, at least,
to the protection of the lives, the health, and the property of the
community against the injurious exercise b}' any citizen of his own
rights. State legislation, strictly and legitimately for police purposes, does not, in the sense of the Constitution, necessarily intrench upon any authority which has been confided, expressly or
by implication, to the national government. The Kentucky statute
under examination manifestly belongs to that class of legislation.
It is, in the best sense, a mere police regulation, deemed essential
to the protection of the lives and property of citizens." Referring
to the numerous decisions of this court guarding the power of Congress to regulate commerce against encroachment, under the guise
of State regulations, established for the purpose and with the effect of destroying or impairing rights secured by the Constitution,
it was further said: "It has, nevertheless, with marked distinctness and uniformit}'^, recognized the necessity, growing out of the
fundamental conditions of civil society, of upholding State police
regulations which were enacted in good faith, and had appropriate

554"

APPENDIX.

and direct connection with that protection to life, health, and property which each State owes to her citizens." See also United
States V. Dewitt, 9 Wall. 41 ; License Tax Cases, 5 Id. 462 ; Pervear v. Commomvealth, Id. 475.
Another decision, very much in point upon this branch of the
case, is Fertilizing Co. v. Hyde Park, 97 U. S. 659, 667, also decided after the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment. The court
there sustained the validity of an ordinance of the village of Hyde
Park, in Cook County, Illinois, passed under legislative authority,
forbidding any person from transporting through that village offal
or other offensive or unwholesome matter, or from maintaining or
carrying on an offensive or unwholesome business or establishment
within its limits. The Fertilizing Company had, at large expense,
and under authority expressly conferred by its charter, located its
works at a particular point in the county. Besides, the charter of
the village, at that time, provided that it should not interfere with
parties engaged in transporting animal matter from Chicago, or
from manufacturing it into a fertilizer or other chemical product.
The enforcement of the ordinance in question operated to destroy the
business of the company, and seriously to impair the value of its
property. As, however, its business had become a nuisance to the
community iu which it was conducted, producing discomfort, and
often sickness, among large masses of people, the court maintained
the authority of the village, acting under legislative sanction, to
protect the public health against such nuisance. It said: "We
cannot doubt that the police power of the State was applicable and
adequate to give an effectual remedy. That power belonged to the
States when the Federal Constitution was adopted. They did not
surrender it, and they all have it now. It extends to the entire property and business within their local jurisdiction. Both are subject
to it in all proper cases. It rests upon the fundamental principle
that every one shall so use his own as not to wrong and injure
another. To regulate and abate nuisances is one of its ordinary
functions."
It is supposed by the defendants that the doctrine for which they
contend is sustained by Pumpelly v. Green Bay Co., 13 Wall. 168.
But in that view we do not concur.
That was an action for the re-

APPENDIX.

555

covery of damages for the overflowing of the plaintiff's land by
water, resulting from the construction of a dam across a river. The
defence was that the dam constituted a part of the system adopted
by the State for improving the navigation of Fox and Wisconsin
rivers ; and it was contended that as the damages of which the
plaintiff complained were only the result of the improvement, under
legislative sanction, of a navigable stream, he was not entitled to
compensation from the State or its agents. The case, therefore,
involved the question whether the overflowing of the plaintiff's land,
to such an extent that it became practically unfit to be used, was a
taking of property, within the meaning of the constitution of Wisconsin, providing that " the property of no person shall be taken for
public use without just compensation therefor." This court said it
would be a very curious and unsatisfactory result, were it held that,
" if the government refrains from the absolute conversion of real property to the uses of the public, it can destroy its value entirely, can
inflict irreparable and permanent injury to any extent, can, in effect,
subject it to total destruction, without making any compensation,
because, in the narrowest sense of that word, it is not taken for the
public use. Such a construction would pervert the constitutional
provision into a restriction upon the rights of the citizen, as those
rights stood at the common

law, instead of the government, and

make it an authority for the invasion of private rights under the
pretext of the public good, which had no warrant in the laws or
practices of our ancestors."
These principles have no application to the case under consideration. The question in Ptimpelly v. Green Bay Company arose under the State's power of eminent domain ; while the question now
before us arises under what are, strictly, the police powers of the
State, exerted for the protection of the health, morals, and safety
of the people. That case, as this court said in Transportation Co.
V. Chicago^ 99 U. S. 642, was an extreme qualification of the doctrine, universally held, that " acts done in the proper exercise of
governmental powers, and not directly encroaching upon private
property, though these consequences may impair its use," do not
constitute a taking within the meaning of the constitutional provision, or entitle the owner of such property to compensation from

556

APPENDIX.

the State or its agents, or give him any right of action. It was a
case in which there was a " permanent flooding of private property," a " physical invasion of the real estate of the private owner,
and a practical ouster of his possession." His property was, in
effect, required to be devoted to the use of the public, and, consequently, he was entitled to compensation.
As already stated, the present case must be governed by principles that do not involve the power of eminent domain, in the exercise of which property may not be taken for public use without
compensation. A prohibition simply upon the use of property for
purposes that are declared, by valid legislation, to be injurious to
the health, morals, or safety of the community, cannot in any just
sense, be deemed a taking or an appropriation of property for the
public benefit. Such legislation does not disturb the owner in the
control or use of his property for lawful purposes, nor restrict his
right to dispose of it, but is only a declaration by the State that its
use by any one, for certain forbidden purposes, is prejudicial to the
public interests. Nor can legislation of that character come within
the Fourteenth Amendment, in any case, unless it is apparent that
its real object is not to protect the community, or to promote the
general well-being, but, under the guise of police regulation, to deprive the owner of his liberty and property, without due process of
law. The power which the States have of prohibiting such use by
individuals of their property as will be prejudicial to the health, the
morals, or the safety of the public, is not— and, consistently with
the existence and safety of organized society, cannot be, burdened
with the condition that the State must compensate such individual
owners for pecuniary losses they may sustain, by reason of their
not being permitted, by a noxious use of their property, to inflict
injury upon the community. The exercise of the police power by
the destruction of property which is itself a public nuisance, or the
prohibition of its use in a particular way, whereby its value becomes depreciated, is very different from taking property for public
use, or from depriving a person of his property without due process
of law. In the one case, a nuisance only is abated ; in the other, unoffending property is taken away from an innocent owner.
It is true, that, when the defendants in these cases purchased or

APPENDIX.

557

erected their breweries, the laws of the State did not forbid the
manufacture of intoxicating liquors. But the state did not thereby give any assurance, or come under an obligation, that its legislation upon that subject would remain unchanged. Indeed, as was
said in Stone v Mississippi, 101 U. S., the supervision of the public health and the public morals is a governmental power, "continuing inits nature," and "to be dealt with as the special exigencies of the moment may require ; " and that, " for this purpose, the
largest legislative discretion is allowed, and the discretion cannot
be parted with any more than the power itself." So in Beer Co. v.
Massachusetts, 97 U. S. 32 : " If the public safety or the public
morals require the discontinuance of any manufacture or traffic,
the hand of the legislature cannot be stayed from providing for
its discontinuance by any incidental inconvenience which individuals
or corporations may suffer."
It now remains to consider certain questions relating particularly
to the thirteenth section of the act of 1885. That section — which
takes the place of section 13 of the act of 1881 — is as follows :
" Sec. 13. All places where intoxicating liquors are manufactured, sold, bartered, or given away in violation of any of the provisions of this act, or where intoxicating liquors are kept for sale,
barter or delivery in violation of this act, are hereby declared to
be common nuisances, and upon the judgment of any court having
jurisdiction finding such place to be a nuisance under this section,
the sheriff, his deputy, or under sheriff, or any constable of the
proper county, or marshal of any city where the same is located,
shall be directed to shut up and abate such place by taking possession thereof and destroying all intoxicating liquors found therein,
together with all signs, screens, bars, bottles, glasses, and other
property used in keeping and maintaining said nuisance, and the
owner or keeper thereof shall, upon conviction, be adjudged guilty
of maintaining a common nuisance, and shall be punished by a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than five hundred
dollars, and by imprisonment in the county jail not less than thirty
days nor more than ninety days. The attorney-general, county
attorney, or any citizen of the county where such nuisance exists, or
is kept, or is maintained, may maintain an action in the name of the

558

APPENDIX.

State to abate and perpetually enjoin the same.

The injunction

shall be granted at the commencement of the action, and no bond
shall be required. Any person violating the terms of any injunction
granted in such proceeding, shall be punished as for contempt, by
a fine of not less than one hundred nor more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail not less than thirty days
nor more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment,
in the discretion of the court."
It is contended by counsel in the case of Kansas v. Ziebold &
Hagelin, that the entire scheme of this section is an attempt to deprive persons who come within its provisions of their property and
of their liberty without due process of law ; especially, when taken
in connection with that clause of section fourteen (amendatory of
section 21 of the act of 1881) which provides that " in prosecutions
under this act, by indictment or otherwise, ... it shall not be
necessary in the first instance for the State to prove that the party
charged did not have a permit to sell intoxicating liquors for the
excepted purposes."
"We are unable to perceive anything in these regulations inconsistent with the constitutional guarantees of liberty and property. The
State having authority to prohibit the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors for other than medical, scientific, and mechanical
purposes, we do not doubt her power to declare that any place,
kept and maintained for the illegal manufacture and sale of such
liquors, shall be deemed a common

nuisance, and be abated, and,

at the same time, to provide for the indictment and trial of the offender. One is a proceeding against the property used for forbidden purposes, while the other is for the punishment of the offender.
It is said that by the 13th section of the act of 1885, the legislature, finding a brewery within the State in actual operation, without
notice, trial, or hearing, by the mere exercise of its arbitrary
caprice, declares it to be a common

nuisance, and then prescribes

the consequences which are to follow inevitably by judicial mandate required b}'^ the statute, and involving and permitting the exercise of no judicial discretion or judgment ; that the brewery being
found in operation, the court is not to determine whether it is a
common nuisance, but, under the command of the statute, is to

APPENDIX.

559

find it to be one ; that it is not the liquor made, or the making
of it, which is thus enacted to be a common nuisance, but the
place itself, including all the property used in keeping and maintaining the common nuisance ; that the judge having thus signed
without inquiry — and, it may be, contrary to the fact and against
his own judgment — the edict of the legislature, the court is commanded to take possession by its officers of the place and shut it
up ; nor is all this destruction of property, by legislative edict, to
be made as a forfeiture consequent upon conviction of any offence,
but merely because the legislature so commands ; and it is done by
a court of equity, without any previous conviction first had, or any
trial known to the law.
This, certainly, is a formidable arraignment of the legislation of
Kansas, and if it were founded upon a just interpretation of her
statutes, the court would have no difficulty in declaring that they
could not be enforced without infringing the constitutional rights
of the citizen. But those statutes have no such scope and are attended with no such results as the defendants suppose. The court
is not required to give effect to a legislative " decree" or " edict,"
unless every enactment by the law-making power of a State is to be
so characterized. It is not declared that every establishment is to
be deemed a common

nuisance because it may have been maintain-

ed prior to the passage of the statute as a place for manufacturing
intoxicating liquors. The statute is prospective in its operation,
that is, it does not put the brand of a common nuisance upon any
place, unless, after its passage, that place is kept and maintained
for purposes declared by the legislature to be injurious to the community. Nor is the court required to adjudge any place to be a
common nuisance simply because it is charged by the State to be
such. It must first find it to be of that character; that is, must
ascertain, in some legal mode, whether since the statute was passed
the place in question has been, or is being, so used, as to make it a
common nuisance.
Equally untenable is the pi'oposition that proceedings in equity
for the purposes indicated in the thirteenth section of the statutes
are inconsistent with due process of law. "In regard to public
nuisances," Mr. Justice Story says, "the jurisdiction of courts of

560

APPENDIX.

equity seems to be of a very ancient date, and has been distinctly
traced back to ttie reign of Queen Elizabeth. The jurisdiction is
applicable not only to public nuisances, strictly so called, but also
to purprestures upon public rights and property. ...

In case

of public nuisances, properly so called, an indictment lies to abate
them, and to punish the offenders. But an information, also, lies
in equity to redress the grievance by way of injunction." 2 Story^s
^q. §§ 921, 922. The ground of this jurisdiction in cases of purpresture, as well as of public nuisances, is the ability of courts of
equity to give a more speedy, effectual, and permanent remedy, than
can be had at law. They can not only prevent nuisances that are
threatened, and before irreparable mischief ensues, but arrest or
abate those in progress, and, by prepetual injunction, protect the
public against them in the future ; whereas courts of law can only
reach existing nuisances, leaving future acts to be the subject of
new prosecutions or proceedings. This is a salutary jurisdiction,
especially where a nuisance affects the health, morals, or safety of
the community. Though not frequently exercised, the power undoubtedly exists in courts of equity thus to protect the public
against injury. District Attorney v. Lynn and Boston R. R. Co.,
16 Gray, 245; Atty-Genl v. N. J. Railroad, 3 Green's Ch. 139;
Atty-General \ . Tudor Ice Co., 104 Mass. 244; State y. Mayor, 5
Porter (Ala.), 279, 294 ; Hooley. Atty-General, 22 Ala. 194 ; AttyGeneral v. Hunter, 1 Dev. Eq. 13 ; Atty-Gen'l v. Forbes, 2 Mylne
& Craig, 123, 129, 133 ; Atty-GenH^. Great Northern Railway Co.,
1 Dr. & Sm. 161 ; Eden on Injunctions, 259 ; Kerr on Injunctions
(2ded.), 168.
As to the objection that the statute makes no provision for a jury
ti'ial in cases like this one, it is sufficient to say that such a mode of
trial is not required in suits in equity brought to abate a public
nuisance. The statutory direction that an injunction issue at the
commencement of the action is not to be consti'ued as dispensing
with such preliminary proof as is necessaiy to authorize an injunction pending the suit. The court is not to issue an injunction simply because one is asked, or because the charge is made that a
common nuisance is maintained in violation of law. The statute
leaves the court at liberty to give effect to the principle that an injunc-

APPENDIX.

561

tion will not be granted to restrain a nuisance, except upon, clear and
satisfactory evidence that one exists. Here the fact to be ascertained was, not whether a place, kept and maintained for purposes
forbidden by the statute, was, jser se, a nuisance — that fact being
conclusively determined by the statute itself — but whether the place
in question was so kept and maintained. If the proof upon that
point is not full or sufficient, the court can refuse an injunction, or
postpone action until the State first obtains the verdict of a jury in
her favor. In this case, it cannot be denied that the defendants
kept and maintained a place that is within the statutory definition
of a common nuisance. Their petition for the removal of the
cause from the State court, and their answer to the bill, admitted
every fact necessary to maintain this suit, if the statute, under
which it was brought, was constitutional.
Touching the provision that in prosecutions, by indictment or
otherwise, the State need not, in the first instance, prove that the
defendant has not the permit required by the statute, we may remark that, if it has any application to a pi'oceeding like this, it
does not deprive him of the presumption that he is innocent of any
violation of law. It is only a declaration that when the State has
proven that the place described is kept and maintained for the
manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors — such manufacture or
sale being unlawful except for specified purposes, and then only
under a permit — the prosecution need not prove a negative, namely,
that the defendant has not the required license or permit. If the
defendant has such license or permit, he can easily produce it, and
thus overthrow the prima facie case established by the State.
A portion of the argument in behalf of the defendants is to the
effect that the statutes of Kansas forbid the manufacture of intoxicating liquors to be exported, or to be carried to other States, and,
upon that ground, are repugnant to the clause of the Constitution
of the United States, giving Congress power to regulate commerce
with foreign nations and among the several States. We need only
say. upon this point, that there is no intimation in the record that
the beer which the respective defendants manufactured was intended to be carried out of the State or to foreign countries. And,
without expressing an opinion as to whether such facts would have
36

562

APPENDIX.

constituted a good defence, we observe that it will be time enough
to decide a case of that character when it shall come before us.
For the reason stated, we are of opinion that the judgments of
the Supreme Court of Kansas have not denied to Mugler, the plaintiff in error, any right, privilege, or immunity secured to him by
the Constitution of the United States, and its judgment, in each
case, is, accordingly, affirmed. We are, also, of opinion that the
Circuit Court of the United States erred in dismissing the bill of
the State against Ziebold & Hagelin. The decree in that case is
reversed, and the cause remanded, with directions to enter a decree
granting to the State such
authorizes.

relief as the act of March 7, 1885„
It is so ordered.

INDEX.
Absinthe, 44.
Academie de Medecine, 245.
Adams,
Judge, Woman's Suffrage,
41!).
Adams, Professor, " Cholera from Alcohol," 86.
Adulteration of liquors, 24.i, etc.
Africa, 2G9, foil., 27(;, 28.5, 490, 491,
51G; population, 516; has intoxi<;ating juices, 2(!(;; rum and rum traffic,
265, 268, 282; east coast and rum
traffic, 277; intemperance, 250; Africa, Asia, and drink, 238; British
possessions, 276.
African Lakes Trading Company, 275.
African Methodist Episcopal Churcli
and temperance, 4G6.
African ^Methodist Zion Church and
temperance, 4(i5.
African slave trade and rum traffic,
277.
Agnew, C. R., M.D., Medical Declaration, 123.
Agricultural Report, 1880.
Alabama, 155, 202, 212; illiteracy, 308.
Alaska, 202; liquor traffic, 213.
Albany, N.Y.. 230.
Albucassis, Arabian discoverer of distillation, 10, 19; concealed invention, 121.
Alcohol: — Definition : Arabic word,
4; Webster, Worcester, Dunglison,
UnitcKl States Pharmacopoeia, Medical Lexicon, Hargreaves, 3. History : discovery by Arabian, Albucassis, 10, 19; concealed liis invention, 121; invention concealed tlirce
hundred years by doctors and cheuiists, 117. Orif/in and Anali/ftis :
product of jiutrefaction, not of a,
life-process, 12, 13; only produced
from sugar, 9; vinous fermentation,
the original, prehistoric production,
1, 2; chiefly produc^^d by vinous fermentation, 8;chemical analysis, 5;
composition and analysis, 80; alcohol and ethyl, amvl, etc, 4; 17 per
cent, in fermented liquors, 10; per
cent, in various liquors, Braiide,
Bence Jones. Prof. John C. Draper,
11; in liquors, 201. Character and
Properties : narcotic acrid poison,
Christison, 70; neither a food nor
poison, but a drug. Pepper, 158;
sp^'ific gravity and properties, 10;
affinity for water, 60; alcohol, even
retaken from brain and venti-icles,
563

Alcohol, continued.
burned, 5(), 57; anhydrous by use of
lime, 11. InviStif/dted i)i the Body :
consumed or eliminated, 35 ; eliiiiination, Richardson, 40; Anstie, Dr.,
"one ounce not eliminated," 60;
cour.se in the body, l(i, 24; what
becomes of retained part, 22. Character ofEffects : on animals, leeclies,
frog,
"turtles, fishes,
71 ;; kills
dog experiments,
71, etc.
poisonlife,
to
animals and plants, 152 ; on man,
" caustic poison," Pereira, Professor,
71; "narcotic acrid poison," Christison, 70; "aqua mortis," Ure, 71;
"always poisonous," Paine, Dr. W.,
140; poison, Fontaine, etc., 137;
" destroys man," Linnajus, 152;
stimulant or jjaralyzant. Billing,
122, 153; poisons the blood, Virchow,
Boecker, Sculz, Bealc, Williams,
Parker, 84; poison, Stille, 125; poisoning in Jjiverpool, 73; paralyzant,
145; induces sleep, 34; narcotic.
Palmer, A. B., Dr., 141; considered
as stimulant, 122. Creates Disease :
alcohol and body, 16; four stages of
action, 31 ; causes disca.se, Ricliardson, 45; produces disease, operation described, Dickinson, 85: effect
on stomach, 81, 132; liver, 50, 51,
foil., 91; kidneys, 50, 51, foil.,
Bright's disease, 91; heart, 50, foil.,
122; Palmer, 144; poisons the blood,
Virchow, Boecker, Sculz, Beale,
Williams, Parker, 84; lungs, 50,
foil. ; vital organs, Hargreaves, 70 ;
brain, nerves, eye, Richardson, 49,
50, foil., Hammond, 67, 68, also 92,
132; apoplexy, palsy, 92; on the
body, Richardson, 45, 46; on the
structures of the body, ibid., 47; on
the system, Davis, 133; on the system. Palmer, 141; kills by affecting
nerve centres and not by coagulation, 57; predisposes to cholera,
Jameson, !JIackin tosh, 86; "cliolera
sold here," Professor Adams, 86;
diseases Oryanizntion
enumerated, :92.dipsomania,
Ejf'ects on
Mental
mania a potu, delirium tremens, 53;
insanity and idiocy, "one-half that
of the world due to alcohol," 92 ;
" thirty per cent, of insanity due to
alcohol," Hargreaves, 94; St. Petersburg, Dublin, Liverpool Asylums,
93; Hargreaves,
Shaftsbury, Need-

564

INDEX.

Alcohol, continued.
ham, and others, 92,93,224; "half
the idiots, cliildren of intemperates," Howe, 96, 224. Mortality,
224; alcohol and long life, 98;
" causes half the sickness and
'death,"
103; and
" thiity-three
percent,
of sickness
death in New
York
City," 104; Nielsen's Statistics, 103;
also see " Life Insurance." Alcohol
in Hereditary Effect : Aristotle, Plutarch, Elam, etc., 96; " four generations," 96 ; Staffordshire clergyman's wife, 96, 97; Ebing, 154; heredity and alcohol, 97, 162, 167,
etc. ; see also Insanity and Idiocy.
Alcohol considered as Food: "a
poison, can it he a food ? " 32 ; " poison, not food," Hargreaves, 74; "always poisons," Paine, Dr. W., 140;
"by no ingenuity a food," 41;
"food or poison," Stille, 125; alcohol not food, discussion of one hundred pages, Hargreaves, 77; Anstie
confuted, 76; " not food, hut poison,"
Dalton, 94; "a poison and in no
sense a food,"
Rembaugh, Food:
151. Considered as a Constructive
contains no nitrogen or constructive
substance, 34; does it fatten? 34;
does not huild tissues, 62; retards
digestion, Todd, Bowman, Thompson,steakMonroe,
84 ; " beef156 timesHargreaves,
more nutritious
than
wine," 153; nutrition, 77; Anstie
confuted, 76; Moleschott's Theory,
alcohol economizes food, exploded,
75; retarding of change of tissues,
not
growth, Hammond,
Davis,health
130.J''Considered
as Force
and Muscular Food: does not produce force, 62; muscular excitement, not muscular force, 43; muscular power, 42; heat and force,
Prout, etc., 146; uses up nerve
power, Brodie, lessens muscirlar
force, Lallemand, Perrin, 84. Considered as Heat Food: is it heatmaking? 36; reduces animal heat,
Richardson, 39; Liebig's Theory on
slight investigation, 56 ; why it does
not produce heat, analyzed, 40; at
first increases surface heat one per
cent., but by cooling heart and internal temperature, 38; danger of
taking alcohol to produce heat because it produces cold, 43; does not
support combustion, Markham, 83;
heat and muscular action, Richardson, Anstie, Davis, 130; reduces
heat, Davis, Prout, Hammond,
Smith, Richardson, 83; alcohol a
heat-diminisher, testimony of Arctic travellers, Ross, Kane, Perry,
Franklin, McRae, Greeley, 82; at
siege of Paris, " did not warm, but
chill," 152. Alcohol as Medicine :
is it medicine? 62; claims for it,
"abundance of gastric juice may
for a time promote digestion," 152;
"great value in critical stages of
acute diseases," 159; "neither a
food nor a poison but a dri\g," Pep-

Alcohol, continued.
per, 158 ; alcohol claimed to be beneficial in indigestion, hay-fever,
pneumonia. Wilder, 149; in heartweakness, confuted, Davis, 133-5;
may remove or abate any injurious
cause. Palmer, 145; claims of physicians against its use, 1.50 ; " Food
and Medicine," paper by Dr. N. S.
Davis, 129; 119 foil. ; is it ever a
medicine? 116, 117; Lambert, 114;
case of young man, Lambert, 114;
not a supposed use of alcohol which
cannot be surpassed by other medicine, Davis, 1S5 ; as sedative and
antipjrretic surpassed, 133; as ansesthetic and anodyne surpassed, Davis,
133; "narcotic or anaesthetic effect
deceptive," Palmer, 144; "not a
quart in thirty years," Davis, 135;
" never for
iiseful
"no
excuse
its as
use a asmedicine,"
food or medicine," Paine, Dr. W., 140; "neither
food nor physic," Higginbottom,
140; letter of Hammond, 69; "use
a concession to prejudice," Davis,
135; "heedless prescription a stigma
on the profession," Wilder, Alex.,
Dr., 148; "may be stricken from
curative agents," Hargreaves, 139;
"better for man were it abolished,"
Hammond, 69; International Medical Declaration, 122. Alcohol and
Labor: destroys one-tenth of human capital, Bourne, 15 ; destroys
wealth, 194; alcohol and pauperism,
160, 161, 168, 225. Alcohol and
Crime, 1(;3, 164, 165, 225, 230, 252,
469, 476; drunkenness and vices,
346, 469; Sir Matthew Hale and
other judges, 168, etc. Alcohol in
Cotnmerce, 14; exchange in Oceanica, 281 ; see also America, Europe,
Asia, India, Africa, Congo Valley,
Oceanica, etc.; also Alohcamnedani.sTO,etc., 266. Alcohol Characterized
Powerful
Mysterious 343;
: Pandora's
box,
384; and
a destroyer,
tyrant
compared with slavery, 284; king,
467; the enemy, 427; Circean power
aiming to be universal, 3 ; sumni ed
up, Richardson, 55. " Alcohol and
Man," Hargreaves, Wm., Dr., 136;
" Alcohol and Science," Hargreaves,
Wm., Dr., 5, 59, 89, 93, 136, 137;
"Alcohol as Food and Poison,"
Hargreaves, 136; " Alcohol in History," Eddy, Richard, D.D., 246,
250, 292, 423; " Alcohol in its Therapeiitic Relations as Food and Medicine," 122.
"Alcoholic Enquiry Commission,"
the bill, 179, 217; presented in vain
to six congresses, 195.
Alcoholism, 94, 95, zxiA passim.
Aldehyde, in the circulation, 40, 61.
Ale, 111; ale, beer and porter, 221;
cost, 216; fattens by its starch only,
34; Povighkeepsie, 149; Albany in
pneumonia, etc., 149; Greenwaysfor
indigestion, Wilder, 149; ale, strong,
percent, alcohol, 12; European, per
cent, alcohol, 12; European, strong,

INDEX.
Ale, contimied.
per cent, alcohol, 12; in Fall River,
192.
Alexander, grossly indulgent, 10 ; 524.
Alexander, James W., total abstinence and mortality, 10.
Alexanders, Christian, have worlds to
conquer, 302.
Algeria, wine, 249.
Allen, Professor, on alcohol, 120.
Allen, Richard, Rev., 466.
Allison, Judge, alcohol and crime,
226.
America, 258, 444, 479; responsibility
for African intemperance, 267.
"America," 522.
American Catholic Total Abstinence
Union, 473, etc.
American Church Temperance Society, 457, etc.
American Illiteracy, .308, 309, etc.
American Society for the Promotion
of Temperance, 1826, 426.
American Temi)erance Society, 1816,
45G.
American Tract Society, tract 221,
428.
Amherst College, 293, 455, 456.
Anderson, James, M. D., Medical
Declaration, 123.
Andover, Professor Stuart, 456.
Andrew, John A., Gov., argument before Massachusetts Legislature, 21,
453.
Andrews, Alfred, Prof., 521.
Anglo-Saxon race, 23S.
Animals, killed by alcohol, 21, 36,
137; Fontaine and others, 1.37; animals and plants poisoned by alcohol,
152.
" Annuairo de Statistique," 244.
Anstie, Francis E., M. D., on .alcohol,
59, 60, 132; doubts Lallemand, 20;
investigation, 35; dog experiments,
21, 36; inferences from expcriiaeiits,
22; on alcohol non-eliminating, (iO;
on alcohol as food, 149; as food and
medicine, ridiculed by others, 76;
on alcohol heat and muscular, 1.30;
stimulants and narcotics, his theory
examined, 75 ; the limit an ounce of
alcohol in twenty-four hours, 114;
alcohol and heredity, 97; Dr. Richardson examines, oJ.folL
Anthony, Susan B., Mrs., Woman's
Suffrage, 415, 416, 417, etc.
Appleton, President, Bowdoin College,
456.
"Aqua vitse, aqiia mortis," Ure, 71.
Arabian discoverer of distillation, 19,
121, 126; Arabian learning 12th century, 10.
Arabic temperance speeches denounce
England and her rum trathc, 277.
Archbishop of Canterbury, 280.
Arctic experiences of alcohol, 138;
Arctic travellers, testimony on alcohol, 82.
Ardent spirits, drinkers and mortality,
103; Kittredge, 430; " ardent spirits
evil spirits," Astley Cooiier, 71.
Aristotle, 303; on hereditary alcoholism, 95.

565

Arizona, 202; liquor traffic, 212; illiteracv, 308.
Arkansas, 155, 202, 212; illiteracy, 308.
Arnott, Neil, M. D., on alcohol, 120.
" Articles of Confederation," 395.
Association Norfolk County, Massachusetts, 1882, 460.
Australia, 518; wine, 249.
B.iAL, .501.
Bacchus, 2.
Baglivi, alcohol as poison, 1.37.
Bailey, George A., head of Good Templars in New Hampshire, 491 ; 2}ortrait, 455.
Bain, George W., Hon., portrait, 163.
Bakers of New York, 51.
Ball, Stephen, total abstinence and
life insurance, 111.
Baltimore, drink and crime, 1870, 164;
Roman Catholic Council, 474, 8;
Catholic Total Abstinence Union,
477 ; National Prison Congress, 165 ;
synod, 458; Washingtouian Society,
1840, 435.
Bai>tists, 441 ; Bethel, 447; church and
temperance,
445, etc. ; Social Union,
.522.
Barasa — Rum origin, letter of African
king, 270.
Barley, " You can't have it to make
liquor,"Frances
463.
Barnes,
J., Mrs., superintendent young women's work, W. C. T.
U., 516, .524; portrnit, 220.
Barney, J. K., Mrs., W. C. T. U.,
524; portrait, 537.
Barrett, F. N., drink bill of United
States, 178, 183; " New York Grocer," 205/oll., 215.
Basoutoland, reformation, 273.
Bastile, 286.
Battery to "Westchester, 227.
Bcale, Dr., " Alcohol poisons the
blood," 84. ^Ym., Dr., on Alexis St.
Beaumont,
Martin, experiments, 87, 88.
Beecher, H. W., " Intoxicants de1.5G.
Beecher, stroy,"Ljnnan,
D.D., ordination,
Plymouth, Conn., 425, 426, 453, 456.
Beer, from barley, analysis, is it food ?
79, 81 ; " barley destroyed to make,"
155; and bread, 80; "six barrels to
equal loaf of bread," 129; fattens
only by its starch, .34; Bavarian,
Licbig, 8; small per cent, alcohol,
12; the most animalizin'jc of liquors,
112; Liebig, Playfair, Hassels, 129;
drinkers, Liebig, Grindrod, Edmiinds, 80 ; English physicians, 119 ;
Davis and others, 129; Muzzey, 86;
the trap, 116; will it reform drunkards ■? 293 ; and porter, 221 ; and
whisky, effects compared, 112; beer
and Alexis St. ^lartin, 89; cases of
use, 82; Lager does not diminish
drunkenness, 81 ; English woman in
Fall River, 191; apoplexy and palsy,
92; and mortality, 103, 112; life insurance, 109, 111; murder, 113; hereditj', 113; traffic large, 157; production in Europe and America, 249;

566

INDEX.

Beer, continued.
in Germany and United Kingdom
248; Canada, 214; England, 240
bill, United States, 207; cost, 217
drinker, quaint definition, 112.
Belgium, 490; patriotic league, 150.
Beliafontaine, Pa., synod, 458, 509.
Belknap, Dr., with Rush, favored fermented drinks, 292 ; and temperance,
424.
Belshazzar, 10.
Bengal, commission, 260.
Benin, R., Africa, 258.
Benson, B. F., Rev.
Bent, M. A., Mrs., "Bugler of W. C.
T. IJ.," portrait, 467.
Berlin, 518; conference, 282; congress,
266 ; and Free Congo, 269, 271.
Berzelius, living organisms in vinous
fermentation, 8.
Bethel, Baptist, Boston, 447.
Bible Christian Church and temperance, 459.
Bible readers, W. G. T. U., 514.
Billing, Archibald, Dr., alcohol a paralyzant, 153.
Birmingham, hardware, 279.
Black, James, Hon., 250.
Blair, Henry W., National Prohibitory Amendment, first presented,
United States House of Representatives, vpith speech, Dec. 27, 1876;
introduced in each Congress since;
reported
States
Senate
Committee byof Unite'd
Labor and
Education;
text of bill, and speech, 307 foil.;
National Educational Bill, presented
since 1881 in United States Senate;
speech and discussion of the same,
501, foil.; opinion, 335; Senate Report
on Woman Suffrage to 49th Congress, 409, foil. ; original letters received from Wm. A. Hammond,
M. D., 69; Edw. W. Lambert, M. D.,
113; Alfred
M.D.,Hargreaves,
125; N". S.
Davis,
M. D.,Stille,
128; Wm.
M.D., 136; W. Paine, M. D., 140;
Prof. A. B. Palmer, M.D., LL.D.,
140, foil. ; Alexander Wilder, M. D.,
of iSTewark, 149, 150; A. C. Rembaugh, M. D., Prof. Wm. Pepper,
M. D., 158; Hon. Louis Shade, 200,
201.
Blood and alcohol, 25, etc. See Alcohol.
Bloomingdale Asylum, alcohol and
insanity, 93.
Bltie Mountains, Africa, 273.
Boecher, Dr., "Alcohol poisons
blood,"cohol for84;
as food,
heatalcohol
and force,
146. 130; alBolton, EngLand, Rechabites and Odd
Fellows, 102.
Bolton, Sarah K., W. C. T. U., 505.
Bonny, Charles C., Africa and drink,
268, 269, 497.
Boston, 234, 367, 494, 522; Baptist
Bethel, " Temperance meeting forty
years," 447; "National Philanthropist," 427; "Boston Globe," Prof.
Hogg, 326; rum to Africa, 27G; "Boston Recorder," 425; liquor dealers,
225; Carpenters' Association, 173.

Bouchardet, Dr., alcohol as food, 130.
Bouquet, 44.
Bourbon whisky,, per cent, alcohol,
12 ; 197, 204.
Bourne, "National expenditure on
alcohol," Dr.,
15. 162.
Bowditch,
Bowdoin College, 456.
Bowen, H. C, celebration, 361.
Bowman, Dr., alcohol retards digestion, 84.
Boyle, alcohol and insurance, 93.
Boy's fatal drink of alcohol, 72.
Brain and alcohol, 53, 67, 91, 343.
Brainerd, 431.
Brande, alcohol in liquors, 11, 12.
Brandy, 273; per cent, alcohol, 11, 12;
European, per cent, alcohol, 12 ; Russian, 249; and cholera, Muzzey, 86.
Brass, R., negro, 268, 269.
Brenthall, Mrs., W. C. T. U., 518.
Brewers' Association Case decided by
United States Supreme Court, 1887,
Appendix.
Briggs,
George N., Gov., 445.
Briggs, Miss, W. C. T. U., 524.
Bright, John, Hon., sister, 518.
Bright's Disease and alcohol, 91.
Bristol merchant, 269.
British Association for Advancement
of Science, 36 ; possessions in Africa,
276; Colonial Temperance Congress,
277; Temperance League, 499;
"Medical Journal," Markham, 83;
British and Colonial Temperance
Congress in London, 259; British
rum obliterated Hottentots, 256.
Briton Life Insiirance Company and
total abstinence, 101.
Brodie, Benj., Sir, Stimulants use up
nerve-power, 84 ; testimony on alcohol, 119.
Brooklyn, 230, 512; drinkeries, Talmage, 368; Medical Declaration,
122.
Brosnan, T. H., total abstinence and
mortality, 110.
Brown, Joseph, senator of Georgia,
331, 333, on Education Bill.
Brown, Miss, W. C. T. U., 524.
Brown stout, per cent, alcohol, 12.
Brown, Wm. Y., D.D., 442.
Biichanan, missionary, 431.
Buckheim's experiments, 57.
Buckley, James M., D. D., Editor of
"Christian Advocate," on Methodist Episcopal Church, 444; beer
ridiculed as food, 81 ; portrait, 445.
Buddhists and vegetable food, 126;
prohibit drink, 260.
Buell, Caroline B., Mrs., corresponding
secretary, W. C. T. U., 515, 616, 524;
portrait, 521.
Buffon,
" Discourse on Nature," on
drink, 155.
Bullock, A. G., life insurance and
total abstinence. 111.
Bunker Hill, 395; to Yorktown, 193.
Buo, Emperor of China, prohibitionist, 2000 B. C, 264, 360.
Bureau of Education, 1881, 315.
Bureau of Statistics, drink bill, 208;
195, 215, 216, 221, 241.

INDEX.

Burgess, Wm., Rev., diagram, " Laud,
Labor and Liquor," 1(I5.
Burgundy, per tent, alcohol, 12.
Burmali and Burmese, 2G0.
Burnett, Mary, Dr., W. C. T. U., 51(5,
521.
Burnett, Wm., Sir, on alcohol, 120.
Burns, Dawson, Rev., "Vital Statistics of Total Abstinence," 100, 101.
Burr, Rowland, drink and crime, 1U5.
Burroughs,
George,
M. D., Medical
Declaration, 120.
Burt, Mary T., Mrs., President W. C.
T. U., of New York, 524; portrait,
379.
Bush,
George,
on alcohol,
Medical
Declaration, 121.
Busli, S. W., Rev., 41)].
Business of rum traffic, .'>47.
Byronlc, " rum and religion," 529.
Cadets of Temperance, 499.
Oairne, W. S., M. P., 277.
Cairo, Egypt, temperance meeting, 277.
Calabar, R., "ruui, not cloth," 270.
Calcutta and drink, 261.
Caledou, Africa, 273.
California, 155, 202, 212, 509 ; illiteracy,
;iOS.
Call, Senator, on Education Bill, 334.
Calvary Branch, temperance society,
365.
Calvary, crucifixions continued, 398.
Cameroons, 268.
Campbell, G. W., Dr., Montreal Medical Declaration, 121.
Canaan, N. II., 4-2.S.
Canada, 250, 449, 518; beer, 214; drink
and crime, 165; Good Temidars, 490;
internal revenue, 215; woman suffrage, municipal, 416.
Cape Colony, Africa, 276, 280, 490;
parliament, 271 ; government commission, 272.
Carlysle, A., Dr., alcohol poison to animals and plants, 152.
Carpenter,
M. G., Mi-s., W. C. T. U..
517.
Carpenter, "W". B., M. D., alcohol on
bodj', 151; mortality and life insurance, 103; intoxication and wages,
172; Dr. Rembaugli, 150.
Carse, Matilda B..^V. C. T. U., 519;
president Woman's Temperance
Publishing Association, Chicago,
portrait, 328.
Cary, Samuel, Gen., 493.
Catholic Church and temi)erauce, 472,
473, 5;>0.
" Catholic Directory," 472.
" Catholic
Temperance Magazine,"
481.
Catholic Temperance Society, Dover,
N. IL, 462.
Catholic Total Abstinence Union, 477,
478, 483.
Caucasian race, 427.
Caucus, origin of political power, 5.39.
Census, 1860, 220; census, 1870, 219,
228; census, 1880, 182, 218, 220, 229,
306, ;3(J5.
" Centennial," 1876, intoxicating liquors excluded, 227.

567

" Centennial Temperance Conference," Philadelphia, 478.
" Centennial Temperance Volume,"
Dr. Dunn, 423, 505.
Central American States, 250.
Cetewaj'O, ex-king of South Africa,
and temperance, 272.
Ceylon, 518; and drink, 261.
Chadwick,
Dr., "Essay on Alcohol,"
71.
Champagne, per cent, alcohol, 12;
European champagne, per cent, alcohol, 12.
Changes of medical opinion on alcohol,
147.
Channing, Wm. E., D.D., 157, 461.
Chapin, E. H., D. D.,453.
Chapin, Sallie F., stiperintendent of
Southern work of W. C. T. U., 516,
520; portrait, 320.
Charleston, S. C, 520.
" Chase's Tavern," Baltimore, 435.
Chatsworth railroad disaster, 203.
Chautauqua Lake, 510.
Cliautauqua Literary and Scientific
Circle and temperance, 498.
Chcadle and Monsall Infirmary, total
abstinence and mortality, 102.
Cheever, George B., Rev., " Dea.
Giles," 456.
Chenii.sts
and alcohol, 4, 5, 17.
Cliestorfield, Lord, on rum traffic, 422.
Chicago, 173, 367, 497, .501, 512, 515,519.
Children and temperance, 481.
Children dead from alcohol, 72.
Children great sufferers from rum
traffic, 397.
Children, loss of, 481.
China, Chinese; 4iX), 491. 516.
China perhaps had distillation before
the r2th century, 10; emperor a
proliihitionist, 2207 B. C, 2(^1, 3(30;
England and opium, 263; English
rum and China, 263; Chinese labor,
322; healing art, 118.
Chloroform not a food, 23.
Cholera and alcohol, 86; "cholera
sold here," 86.
Christendom,
.348, 452.
Christian (in India) "to eat pork and
drink liquor," 2(50 ; Christian nations, are there any? Ciiri.stian population of the world. 472; Christians
selling rum to heathen nations, 268 ;
Christians denounced by Arabic
teachers, 277.
" Christian Advocate," 164; Buckley,
81.
" Christian Church " and temperance,
quadrennial convention, 1882, 463.
Christianity, 361 ; " crimes in thy
name," 280; "Christianity and
Christian nations," 481; " Christianity and drinking," Africa, 267 ; Christianity and Sandwich Islands, 256.
Church, an educator, 299; churches
enlightened, 431.
Church of England temperance society, 263, 364.
"Church
of God" and temperance,
446.
Cider, Muzzey, 86 ; per cent, alcohol,
12; European, per cent, alcohol, 12.

568

INDEX.

Cincinnati, 367, 508, 509; platform of
Democrats, 337.
Citizen's Law and Order League, 486,
496.
"Civilized nations the drunken nations," 256.
Clapp, Eugene, Hon., head of Sons of
Temperance, United States, 494;
portrait, 425.
Claret, per cent, alcohol, 12; European, ditto, 12.
Clark, A., M. D., Medical Declaration, 123.
Clark, N. G., D. D., 264.
Clark, Sir James, on alcohol, 119.
Clarke, Dr., in South Africa, 277Claudius, Emperor, suppressed drink
houses, 360.
Cleary, Father, 478.
Cleveland, Ohio, 230, 509, 511 ; W. C.
T. U., 512.
Clubh, Rev. Henry S., 459.
Clyde, 509.
Cochrane, J. S., Rev., 249.
Coffee-houses, Rembaugh, 156.
Coleman, Jvilia, Miss, superintendent
literature of W. C. T. U., 524; portrait, 348.
Collier, Wm., first temperance editor,
446.
Collins, N. Y., 281.
Cologne spirits, 197.
Colorado, 155, 202, 212 ; illiteracy, 308 ;
woman suffrage, 414; and schools,
415.
Colored people, 515.
Colquitt, Alfred H., Hon., on Education Bill, 331 ; portrait, 36.
Columbia College Medical School, 90.
" Common Sense " in Revolution, 423.
Conaty, Thomas J., Rev., 483.
Conference, W. C. T. U., 515.
Congo Free State, 266, 282, 283; Congo valley, 265, 282.
Congregational Church, 529; and temperance, 454 ; first organized societj',
first series of sermons, 456.
Congress, United States and Congo,
282.
Congressional Temperance Society,
445.
Connecticut, 155, 202, 212, 308; Connecticut crimes, 226.
'* Connecticut General Life Insurance," total abstinence and mortality, 110.
" Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance," total abstinence and mortality, no.
" Consciencelishman,through
pocket" of Eng280.
Constitution of United States, 391,
434.
Constitutional Prohibitory Amendment, 463.
Consumer's right questioned, 345.
" Contemporary Review," 280.
Cook, Joseph, suffrage on intemperance, 363; portrait, 145.
Coolies and drink, 262.
Cooper, Sir Astley, " ardent spirits,
evil spirits," 71; denounced beerdrinkmg, 112.

Cooper, Bransby, on alcohol, 119.
Copeland, Dr., on alcohol, 120.
Corporations, W. C. T. U., 515.
Costelloe, Mary W., W. C. T. U.,
518.
Cotton, C. B., labor on liquor traffic,
215.
Courten, alcohol as poison, 137.
Covenanters, 468.
Cowden, Mrs., Rev., W. C. T. U., 506.
Cowherd, Wm., Rev., 459.
Crime and alcohol, 225, 476 ; and drink,
163, 164, 165 ; Hale and other judges,
168, etc.; drink and pauperism, 168;
and drunkenness, 469; and vices,
346.
" Crisis presses on us," 396.
Crocodile nature, 276.
Crosby, Alpheus, of Manchester, N.
H., testimony labor and drink, 172,
177, 192.
Crowther, Bishop, 270.
Crusade in Basoutoland, 273.
Crusade, woman's work, 398, foil.
Crusader, 396.
Cullom, Senator, Education Bill, 333.
Cumberland Presbyterian Church and
temperance, 429.
Cushman, Bessie "W., M. D., W. C. T.
U., 510.
Cuyler, Theodore L., D. D., 487 ; " alcohol demands more and more," 151.
Cyprus, wine, 249.
Czar, stops physician's salary, 118;
" represents his people," 401.
Da Costa, Dr., 457.
Dakota, 202; liquor traffic, 213; illiteracy, 308.
Dalton, Professor, " alcohol poison,"
74.
Dante's
Inferno, 367.
Dark Continent, 265, 276.
Dartmouth College, 456 ; Medical College, 427.
Davis, E".
S., M.D., Medical
Chicago, Asso"Father of American
ciation," 127; 83, 141, 159, 424, 428;
diseases of alcohol, 91; paper on
alcohol, 129; letter to Blair, 129;
portrait, 90.
Davis, Noah, Judge, crime and drink,
164.
Day, President, Yale College, 466.
" Dea. Giles' Distillery," Cheever, 456.
Dead Sea, 291.
Declaration of Independence, 236, 246.
Dedhra Dhoon, India, 262.
Deer Island, Mass., 162, 226.
Delafield, Dr. Edward, Medical Declaration, 123.
Delano, Commissioner, 220.
Delaware, 155, 202 ; illiteracy, 308.
Delirium tremens, 54, 370; and African chief, 274; in St. Petersburg
Hospital, 93.
Democracy,
447 ; Cincinnati platform,
337.
Denmark, 490.
Des Moines, license experiment, 154.
Devil, Shakspeare, 343.
Dewey, Charles, total abstinence and
life insurance. 111.

INDEX.

Dexter,
Hon. Samuel, " circular,"
1814.
Diagrams, colored, saloon map of
New York, Battery to Central Park:
colored (Dr. Thomas Sewall) ; stomach in various stages under use of
alcohol, 81; cancerous stomach, 54;
liver in various stages of use of
alcohol, 72; kidneys in stages of
alcoholic use, (33: cost of drink
and living in United States, 232;
life-rates of brewers compared with
other crafts, 105; longevity of Sons
of Temperance comparted with nonabstaining organizations, lOti ; wages
and expenditure for drink, 237.
Dickinson, Dr. W., " morbid effects
of alcohol," 85.
Digestive system and alcohol, 49, etc.
Dingley, Governor, of Maine and prohibition, .370.
Dipsomania, 53.
"Disciples of Christ" and temperance, 452.
" Discourse on Nature," Buffon, 155.
Diseases from alcohol enumerated, !)2.
Distillation discovered 12tii century,
2; by Albucassis, 10; he secreted,
lit; process, K); increases alcohol,
10; 40 per cent., 11.
Distilled liquors eiuimerated, " bramly,
whisky, rum, and gin," 11; only a
few centuries. I'J, 201, 42(). etc. ; in
United States, 198 ; table, 18G3-18Sli,
197.
Distilleries in 1792, 424; in United
States, 215, 234 ; stopped, 435.
District of Columbia, 202, 304, 308, 31(!,
373, 387, 503, 517, 532.
Dix, Governor, message, drink and
crime, 1(J4.
Dodge, Hon. W. E., 457, 48(j, 489.
Dog, experiment witii alcohol, Percy,
71, 78; Anstie, 21, G7 (see before).
Dolpli, Senator, Education Bill, .334.
Dorchester, Daniel, D.D., "Liquor
Problem," 12, 423, 42(5, etc. ; portrait,
45.
Dow, Hon. Neal, Father of Maine
Law, 4.">(i, 45G, 4()3; portrait, 437.
Draper, Dr. .lolm C, 11, 12.
Drink, statistics, 195; and products,
United States, 232; bill, United
States, 179; "New York Grocer,"
208; and crime, 103, 4, 5, 8, », 2S2,
409 ; labor, 175 ; uses up 10 per cent,
of labor, 175; and wages, 175; and
poverty, 169.
Drinking, why Fall River people
drink? 191; saloons in United
States, 155; habits of India, Greyson, 259.
,
Drunkard arraigned, Powderly, 184;
in United States, 223; "a drunken
people can not be a free people,"
Cook, 303.
Drunkenness and crime, 282, 469.
Dublin Lmiatic Asylum and alcohol,
93.
Dmiedin, New Zealand, 282.
Dunglison, Dr., Medical Lexicon defines alcohol, 4; poison, food, medicine, 63, 64.

o69

Dunn, Dr., " Centennial Temperance
Volume," 423.
Duplain, vinous fermentation, 9.
Dupre, Dr., do;ibts on alcohol, 21;
alcohol, non-elimination, 59.
Duroy, Dr., investigations, 35, 50, 59,
61; alcohol never food, 20.
Dutch
intiuence for rum in Afiica,
273 ; government and South Africa,
27; Dutch
government
asked
by
heathen to abandon rum traffic, 273.
Dutch Reformed Church in Africa,
277.
Dyer, Oliver, 227.
East Africax Coast, 280.
Eastern Churches, population, 472.
Eaton, Hon. John, 307.
"Eat ijork, drink liquor — a Christian," India, 200.
Ebing, Dr. Croft, alcohol and heredEconomy,
ity," 154. 181.
Eddy, liichard, D. D., " Alcohol in
History," 245, 246, 292, 293, 3(i0, 423,
453.
Edmunds, George F., 313, 314, .315;
Education Bill, 331.
Edmunds, James, M. D., alcohol and
food, 78, 137; and Dr. Remliaugh,
150; beer drinking, 80; total abstinence and mortality, 1.39.
Education and rescue, 29(5; and temperance, 228; W. ('. T. U.,517; not
complete witliout moral element,
298; and labor, 172; in United
States, 1870, 22.S; Education Bill, H.
W. Blair and others, .305, etc.
Edwards, .lustin, I). D., 44(5, 456;
Massachusetts Society for the Promotion of Temperance, 42().
" Effects of ardent spirits," Dr. Rush,
42;i.
Egerton, "William, 451.
Egypt, 490; gods, invention of wine,
2; Mohammedanism, 260; demoralized by England, 277.
Elam, Dr., hereditary passions, 9(5.
Elderberry wine. i)er cent, alcohol, 12.
Eliot, Dr. Ellsworth, Medical Declaration, 123.
Elliot, William G., D. D., 461, 478.
Ellison,
26">.
Emir of Rev.
Nupe, Canon,
271.
Emperor Claudius shut drinkinghouses, 3(50 ; Emperor of China and
prohibition, 2000 B.C.
Emperor life insurance and total abstinence, secretary's report, 101.
" Empiricism to prescribe unknown
alcoholic beverages," Hargreaves,
146.
England, 225, 451 : physicians on alcohol, 18.39, 119; Medical Declaration.
123; register-general, alcob.ol and
mortality, 105 T total abstinence and
mortality, Carpenter, 103; asylum
and alcohol, 92; drink, 239; cholera
statistics, 87; Good Templars, 490
etc. : Chinese and opium, 263.
English, Parliament, .373; law, .383;
physicians and alcohol, 1839, 119;
Medical Declaration,
123; asylum

570

INDEX.

English, continued.
and alcohol, 92; insurance and
provident institutions and alcoliol,
99; English queen not to allow
barasa, 271 ; English and drink in
Burmah, 261; English governor and
South Africa, 271 ; English responsible for rum trafhc, 260 ; in Africa,
267; in China, 263; in India, 262,
263; in Madagascar, 279 ; denounced
in Arabic ior the rum traffic, 277,
422 ; English women iii Fall River,
191; non-conformists and Madagascar, 278.
" Enquiry
Kiish, 292. into ardent spirits," Dr.
" Essay on Alcohol," Chadwick, 71.
Europe, 250, 255, 257, 278, 444, 479, 490.
Europeans, alcoholic beverages, 12;
distilleries in South Africa, 275 ; denounced, 277.
" Evangelical Association " and temperance, 467.
Evangelistic department W. C. T. U.,
514, 518.
Evarts, Jeremiah, 455.
Evarts, William, Senator, on Education Bill, 331, 456.
Experience, the Great Reformer, 434.
Experiments on animals, 71, 78 ; Anstie, 21, 67, 71, 152, etc. ; of wine on
heart, Parkes, Wallowicz, 28, 29.
" Experiments and Observations on
Digestion,"
etc.. Dr. William Beaumont, 88.
Eye and alcohol, 52.
Eyre, Sir J., on alcohol, 119.
Fabius, 524.
Fairbanks, Hon. A. G., letter, drink
and crime, 167.
Fairbanks scales, 296.
Fairs, W. C. T. U., 515.
Falck, Dr., alcohol as poison, 137.
Fall River, labor and drmk, 189; English women, 191.
Farre, A., Dr., on alcohol, 120.
" Father of American Medical Association," Davis, N. S., 128.
Faxon Henry, of Quincy, 461; portrait, 181.
"Federal Herald," 1789.
Fermentation, produces alcohol, 8;
vinous, at temperature 70°, 8; fermented liquors, from fruits and vegetables, 9; from Indian corn and potatoes, 1 ; only fermented liquors till
12th century, 10 ; distinguished from
distilled or ardent spirits, 11; do not
cure drinking of ardent spirits, 248.
" Figures of Hell," Elizabeth Thompson, 219.
Fiji, 28.
Finch, John B., Hon., late head of
Good Templars, portrait, 357.
First Medical Declaration, Sir Benjamin Brodie and seventy-five others,
119.
Fisher, G. J., Dr., Medical Declaration, 124.
Fishes paralyzed by alcohol, 71.
Piske,
153. Prof. John, "narcotic thirst,"

" Five thousand one hundred and ten
gobletsTheodore
a year," moderation,
292. of
Flood,
L., D.D., editor
" Chautauquan," portrait, 499.
Florida, 155, 212 ; illiteracy, 308.
Flower, Mrs., W. C. T. U., 515.
Fontaine, alcohol as poison, .37 ; alcohol kills leeches, frogs, turtles and
fishes, 71.
Food, defined; Webster, Worcester,
Dunglison, 63 ; Hargreaves, 137 ; destroyed, alcohol prodiiced, by fermentation,^ 9;nitrogenous and nonnitrogenous, 6, 7, 8; and liquors,
233; see Alcohol as Food.
Forbes, John, Sir, on alcohol, 120.
" Foresters " and mortality, 106.
" Forum,"
alcohol, 83.Greeley on Arctic use of
Foster, J. Ellen, Mrs., President of
W. C. T. U., Iowa, 524; portrait,
389.
"Foundations of death," Gustafson,
Alexander, 151.
Foiircroy, vinous fermentation, 9.
Fourth of July, 1776, 421.
Fox, destroyed by alcohol, 152.
France, 185; wine, 249; liquors, 250;
drink, 243; alcoholism, 11, 245; consumption of liquors, 251 ; liquors
and treaties, 392; rum to Africa, 264,
269, 276 ; asylums and alcohol, 93.
Franchise, W. C. T. U., 515.
Frank,
104. Dr., "distillation a fatal gift,"
Franklin, Benjamin, and temperance,
391, 424.
Franklin, John, Sir, Arctic use of alcohol, 82.
Frederick V., Count Palatine, Moderation Temperance Society, 292.
Free Baptist Church and temperance,
" Zouaves of Heaven," 462.
Free State of Congo, 266, 269, 271.
Freethinkers and schools, 301.
French asylums and alcohol, 93.
" French Magazine " on alcohol, 246.
Friendly J., Mrs., W. C. T. U., 515.
" Friends, Society of," and temperance, 441, 451.
Frog and alcohol, 71.
Fruit wines, 204.
Fundamental Propositions, 249, foil.
Funk I.trait, 99.K., editor of " Voice," porFusel oil, 11.
Gambrell, Roderick Dhu, " The
Mississippi Mavtyr," portrait, 127.
Ganges, 161.
Gannett, Ezra, D.D., 461.
Garland, Senator, on Education Bill,
Garrison, William L., 446.
Gellius, heredity and alcohol, 155.
Geneva spirit, per cent, alcohol, 12.
George, Senator, on Education Bill,
Georgia, 155, 202, 212, 470, 520; illiteracy, 308; North Conference, 1882,
469.
German 332."
Moderation Societies, 1517,
291.

INDEX.
Oerman

Rjfeformed Church and temperance, 458.
Germans at Berlin Conference and
rum traffic, 271.
Germany, 250, 490, 516; intellectuality, 450; religious feeling, 450;
wine, 249; drink, 247; climate and
beer, 81 ; consequences of liquor,
251; beer and spirits, 247; carries
drink, 264 ; responsibility for African
drinking, 267, 269; rum for Africa,
276.
Giant Despair, 538 ; partnership, 205.
Gibbons, Cardinal, 473, 475 ; portrait,

Gibson, Alan G. S., Rev., missionary
in South Africa, 272.
Gibson, Senator, on Education Bill,
333.
OilTord, O. P., D. D., 445, 448.
Gillette, Walter R., Dr., total abstinence and mortality, 110; Medical
Declaration, 123.
Gin, 11, 197, 204, 269; Holland, per
cent, alcoliol, 12; London, per cent,
alcohol, 12; gin versus missions,
269; gin trade and Cliristianity, 280.
Glasgow, cloth, 270; medical institutions, 86.
Gold Coast, 276, 490.
Golden Rule, 436.
Goldie, Hugh, Rev., African missionaiy, 269.
Gomorrah, 391.
Good Templars, 49, 281, 282, 465, 486,
489,491.
Oordon, Anna, missionary associate of
Miss Willard, W. C. T. U., 522;
portrait, 190.
Gordon, Dr., alcohol a poison, not
food, 78.
Gordon, Mrs. A. J., W. C. T. U., 524.
Gougli, John B., 4.56.
Gougli, the heathen, 274.
Graham, Robert, 365; "New York
City and Masters," 364.
Grain used up, 251; used in United
States, 215.
Grant, U. S., President, 5000 postmistresses, 415.
Grapes used up, 251.
Graphiphone. 217.
Gray, Cliarlotte A., W. C. T. U., 518.
Great Britain and Ireland, 281 ; consumption of liquor, 251; rum bill,
480; rum to Africa, 276; Good
Templars,
"Woman's
Suffrage,
municipal, 4()6;
41(> (see
also Enrfland).
Greece, wine, 249.
Greeks forbade wine to women, 96.
Greelev. General, Arctic use of alcohol, 8.3.
Green, F. M., 452.
Greene, Colonel, life insurance and
total abstinence, 109.
Greenland, 286.
Gregson, E., Mrs., W. C. T. U., 518.
Gregson, J. Gilson, Rev., India liquor,
259; " Anglican intoxicants worse
than heathen customs," 259.
Griffin, AlViert, Hon., Chairman AntiSaloon Republican National Committee, 417 ; portrait, 136.

571

Grindrod, Dr., on London beer-drinker,
80.
Gross, G. W., Rev., 467.
Gustafson, Alexander, " Foundations
of Death," 151.
Guy, Professor, on alcohol, 120.
Guy's
Hospital,
London,
and
Sir
Astley Cooper, 112.
Haddock, George C, Rev., " The
Iowa jVIartyr." portrait, 118.
Hale, Edward E., D. D., 461,
Hale, Matthew, Sir, drink and crime,
163.
Hall, L. M., drink and crime, inebriate women, 165.
Hall, ]Marshall, Dr., on alcohol, 119.
Hall, AVilliam B., M. D., Medical
Declaration, 123.
Hamilton, Archdeacon, 269.
Hamilton, J. Taylor, Rev., 459.
Hammond, W. A., Dr., experiments
of alcohol on new system, 67; alcohol, 132; alcohol as poison to animals, 137 ; as decreasing waste, 130;
decreasing heat, 83; medical use,
69; better abolished, (i9; New York
lecture, 61 ; letter to Senator Blair,
69.
Hampton Wade, 331; on Education
Bill, 3.34.
Hardy, bonus in temperance section
of life insurance company, 104.
Hargreaves, William, M. D., " Alcohol
and Science," 5, 59. 89, 93, etc.;
"Alcohol and ^lan," "two vast
arsenals," VM\; defines alcohol, 5;
detines foods, 6; nitrogenous aliments, 7; vinous fermentation, 9;
elimination of alcohol, 59; alcohol a poison, not a food, 74; discussion of one hundred pages that
alcohol is not food, 77; alcohol
retards digestion, 84; total abstinence, 87; cites Beaumont on St.
Martin, 89; alcohol and insanity,
92, 93, summary; "half of .sickness
and death by alcohol," 103; statistics
of occupation and alcohol in England, 104; letter to H. W. Blair,
136; Dr. Rembaugh, 150; drink and
crime, 1(>5; drink bill of United
States, 179; expense of living, 182;
cost of liquor traffic, 215; tables, 216,
220, 221, 223, 228; statement of drink
bill, 229; diagram, 227; portrait, 9.
Harris, C. R., Rev., 4<J6.
Harris, Elisha, M. D., 162; Medical
Declaration, 123; crime, 163.
Harrison, Senator, on National Education Bill, .3:^5.
Hartford Life and Annuity Life Insurance Company, total abstinence
and life insurance, 111.
Hashish and opium liabits, 18.
Hassels on beer, 129.
Hastings, S. D., Hon., 491.
Hawaiian Islands, 518.
Haygood, A. D., Dr., 469.
Health and heredity, 516.
Heart and alcoliol, 52, 66.
Heat, only surface heat produced by
alcohol, 43.

572

INDEX.

Hendrickson, W. C, Rev., 458.
Heredity
and alcohol, 516; idiocy,
Howe,
96; and drunkenness,
54;
alcohol and insanity, 95; see also
Alcohol and Heredity.
Herman, Dr., brandy shops in St.
Petersburg, 93.
Herod of massacre, license, 368.
Hesse, Landgraves, 292.
Hewett, Rev. Dr., 456.
Hewitt, William, 249.
Higginbottom, John, M. D., "alcohol
neither food nor physic," 140.
High license, 367, etc.
Hill, Calvin, Rev., total abstinence,
456.
Hillsboro County, N. H., 167.
Hillsboro, Ohio, 505.
Hindoo and drink, 259; despises liquor, 261.
Hindostan, 258.
Hippocrates, 303.
Hitchcock, Dr., 224.
Hitchcock, President, of Amherst
College, 293, 456.
Hoar, George F., Senator of Massachusetts, on National Education
Bill, 331.
Hoffman, Clara, Mrs., portrait, 528.
Hofmeyer, N. J., Prof., 277.
Hogg, Alexander, Prof., on American
illiteracy, 326.
Holland, 490, 516; Holland gin, per
cent, alcohol, 12; dykes, 382; Reformed Dutch and temperance, 448.
Holland, Henry, Sir, on alcohol, 120.
Holy Land, 396.
Home the primary field, 298; and alcohol, 298; destroyed by rum, 398;
temperance a war for home, 398.
Home Life Insurance Company, total
abstinence and mortality, 110, 112.
" Homiletic Review," total abstinence
and sickness in England, 106.
Hood, Ellen, W. C. t. U., 517.
Hood, J. W., Rev., 465.
Horner, Professor, stomach and alcohol, 90.
Hospital built by rum, 281.
Hotel bar-room, 368.
Hottentots and rum, 271; obliterated
by British rum, 256.
House of Commons, 277, etc.
House of Representatives, 179, etc.
Howard, p. 5, liquor cases. Reports of
the United States Supreme Court,
434.
Howard, Robert, 189.
Howe, Dr., alcohol and idiocy, heredity, 96.
Hoyle, William, of London, tables,
241, foil.; liquor bill of England,
242.
Hudson, Erasmus D., M. D., Medical
Declaration, 123.
Hudson, Erasmus D., Jr., M. D., Medical Declaration, 123.
Hudson River, 481.
Huey, Samuel C, total abstinence and
life insurance, 111.
"Human Bodj^," Prof. H. N. Martin,
143.
" Human Suffrage," 400.

Humphrey, Heman, President, Amherst College, Sermon Panoplist
Articles, 455.
Hunt, E. M., Dr., " alcohol in therapeutics as food and medicine," 122.
Hunt, Mary H., Mrs., temperance
education, 305, 517; portrait, 303.
Iceland, 490.
Idaho, 202, 213; illiteracy, 308.
Idiocy and alcohol, "Half of idiots
children of intemperates," Howe,
96 ; Hitchcock, 224.
Illinois, 155, 202, 212, 222; illiteracy,
308, 492, 509.
Illiteracy in United States, 305, 306;
tables, 308.
Impure literature, W. C. T. U., 515.
"Inalienable rights," 340.
Independence Hall, Philadelphia, 421.
India, cholera statistics, 87; Catholic
and Protestant missions, 258 ; drink,
263; under British liquor, a " Garden
of Death," 263; "Good done by
Empress of India worse than undone
by English liquor," 261; route to,
490 ; 265.
Indian Ocean, 278.
Indiana, 202, 212, 308, 509.
Indians and alcohol, 71 ; Indian tribes,
378.
Inferno of Dante, 367.
Ingham, Mary A., W. C. T. U., 512.
Insanity and alcohol, " One-half the
insanity
of and
the world,"
see
Alcohol
Insanity.92, 224; also
" Insurance Guide of England," on
total abstinence and mortality, 104.
Intemperance increasing, 1823, 425;
among women, 397.
Internal revenue, 197, 220, 366; reports, 200; report, 1882, 234.
" International African Trading Association," 266.
International Congress and alcohol,
149.
International Medical Declaration on
■ alcohol, Philadelphia, 1876, 122.
International prohibition, 282.
Intoxicating liquors excluded from
Centennial grounds, 227.
Iowa,
20^2, woman
212; illiteracy,
woman155,office,
suffrage, 308;
415,
509.
Ireland, 281 ; drink, 239; " Good TemIreland, John,
plars," 490. Bishop, 478; speeches,
479;
"
Father
Mathew of his time,"
473.
Irishmen and alcohol, 480.
" Irish Temperance League," 499.
Irvine, James, 267, 268.
Italy, wines, 245 ; and wine, 249.
Jackson, Senator, on National Education Bill, 334.
Jacobi, alcohol as poison, 137.
Jago, John W., 282.
Jameson, Dr., alcohol and cholera, 88.
"Janus' Temple of Intemperance always open," 223.
Janv'riu,tion, 123.
J. E., Dr., Medical Declara-

INDEX.
Japan and drink 264; sake, the drink,
2(>4; Emperor of Japan, 516.
Jew and public scliools, 301.
Jewell, Benj. K., secretary Massachusetts Temperance Society, portrait,
172.
Jewell, Charles, M. D., 456.
Johnson, Andrew, President, administration, 21S.
Johnson, James, Rev., 277.
Johnson, John Herrick, Rev. Dr.,
"amendment," 442.
Jonas, Senator on National Education
Bill, 333.
Jones, Absalom, Rev., 466.
Jones, Bence, alcohol in liquors, 11,
12.
Jones, S. T., D. D., 466.
Jones, Senator, on National Education Bill, 334.
" Journal de la Statistique," 244.
"Journal Statistical Society," 249.
" Journal United Labor," 183.
Jugj^ernaut, license, 368.
Juvenile work, W. C. T. U., 514.
Kama, Chief, South Africa, 272.
Kane, Elisha K., use of alcohol in
Arctic re.i^ion, 82^
Kansas, 155, 202, 212; illiteracy, :V)S;
woman suffrage,
school,
414, 41."), 501);
woman
suffrage
discussion,
417;
Griffin's speecli, 418.
Kansas Historical Society, 41!).
Kasson, John A., Hon., 271.
Kear.sey, Steiihen H., India and Burmah, 260.
Kennedv, Superintendent, 221.
Kentucky, 202, 212; illiteracy, .308;
woman suffrage, school, 415.
Keshub Chuuder Sen, denoimced
drink, 259.
Kidneys
alcohol, 51; Bright's
Disease, and
91.
Kimball, Lucia E. F., W. C. T. U.,
517.
Kindergarten, 517.
King Alcohol , 539.
Kittredge, Jonathan, " Address on
effects of ardent spirits " at Lyme,
N. H., 1827, 428, 429, 430, 431.
Klien, L. A., Dr., alcohol at siege of
Paris, " did not warm, but chill,"
152.
Knapp, B. F., Rev., 4W.
Knaijp, Jacob, Washingtonian movement due to his address, 435, 446.
Knights of Labor, Powilei-ly, grand
defence of exclusion of liquor dealers, 183; a great movement for humanitj% Powderly, 185, 484.
Knox, N. H., Mrs., president W. C. T.
U. of New Hampshire, 524; portrait, 229.
Labakee, Rev., missionary in Persia,
250.
Labor and capital, 172, 209; distribution, 192; drink, 169, 170, 175; education, 172; ameliorated by prohibition, ISO; movement, McNeill, 181;
" labor and temperance one movement," 193.

573

La Fetra, Sarah D., Mrs., President
W. C. T. U. District Columbia,
portrait, 367Lallemand. 1860, alcohol never food,
20; investigations on alcohol, 35, 56,
59, 61, 132; alcohol lessens muscular
force, 84; his investigations and
others a landmark, 57.
Lamar, L. Q. C, Senator, 331; on
National Education Bill, 332.
Lambert, Edw. W., Dr., letter to
H. W. Blair, 115.
" Land, labor, and liquor," Burgess,
William, Rev., 105.
Landras, Ur., alcohol as food, 130.
Langworthy, Isaac, D. D., 455, 456.
Lansingboi-g, N. Y., 292.
Lathrop, Mary T., jNIrs., President
W. C. T. U. ^Michigan, 524, portrait,
286.
Ltlw and agitation, 339.
" Law and "Order League," 496.
Leamimj, J. R., Dr., Medical Declaration, 124.
Leavenworth, Kansas, woman's suffrage, 418.
Leavitt, Mary Clement, Mrs., world's
missionary W. C. T. U., 516; portrait, 27(i.
20.
" Lectures on Alcohol," Richardson,
Lee, J. W., Rev., 470.
Leeches and alcohol, 71.
Lees, Dr., denied alcohol a heatmaker, 36; "Alcoholic Alphabet,"
57, 58.
Legislation on temperance, right of,
examined, .382.
Legislative work W. C. T. U., 514.
Leftch, M. W., Miss, W. C. T. U., 518.
Leoser, Charles McK., ]'J8.
Liberty and Revolutionary War, 422.
License, high, a failure, Rcrabaugh,
151; philosophy, 3.53; New York
City a specimen, 3()3; Herod, Moloeii, Juggernaut, 368; License is
prohibition in a degree, 383.
Liebig, Baron, decomposition, 7; living organisms in vinous fermentation, 8; his theory that alcohol furnishes heat, 56; his tlieory disjiroved,
57; his theory without basis, Hargreaves, 74; Liebig ridicules resort
to alcohol as food, 79; " beer, wine,
and spirits not vitalizing," 80; deceived by surface heat, 83; "wine
expends power," 84; Liebig and
beer, 129, i;i8; alcohol "respiratory
food confuted by others," 130, 146;
" theory untrue," 147.
Life, a business commodity, 98.
Life insurance and alcohol, 98; and
total abstinence, 103, 108; in England, Dr. Carpenter, 103, 139; Anstie, 114; testimonies, 109; nine
Presidents'
opinions on
nence and mortality,
110. total abstiLife insurance companies and total
abstinence, 100, 101; should use
their power for total abstinence, 108.
Lincoln, Abraham, President, administration, 218.
Linnajus, alcohol destroys man, 152.

574

INDEX.

Liquor dealers excluded from Knights
of Labor, 183; are they " respectable"? 200; of Massachusetts, 225.
" Liquor Dealers' Association," 354.
" Liquor Problem of All Ages," Rev.
Daniel Dorchester, D.D., 423, 435,
Liqrior traffic, 14, 199; statistics, 1886,
212, 213 ; of the world, cost, 250.
Liquors at ordinations, 1810, 425.
Lisle and drink, 240.
Litchfield, Connecticut, Dr. L. Beecher, 425.
"Litchfield Temperance Society,"
292.
Literature, Temperance Department
W. C. T. U., 515.
Little, H. W., Rev., 277.
Liver and alcohol, 50, 91.
Livermore, Mary A., Mrs., portrait,
141.
Liverpool, alcohol poisoning cases, 73;
merchant, 267.
" Liverpool Sun Association " and
alcohol, 93.
Livingstone, 265, 275.
Locke, W. E., Mrs., W. C. T. U.,
518.
Logan, John, Senator, 317; on National Education Bill, 334.
Lomax, Thomas H., 466.
London beer drinker, 80.
" London
Missionary Association,"
278.
"London Sons of Temijerance " and
mortality, 106.
" London Temperance Congress,"
1886, 259, 263.
" London Temperance Hospital," total
abstinence and life, 102.
"Loudon Times," alcohol and insurance, 93; 156, 231.
Lonzoni, alcohol as poison, 137.
Lord, Nathan, D.D., President, Dartmouth College, 456.
Lord's Supper and wine, 467, 515, 518.
Lorenz, E. S., Rev., on "United
Brethren," 452.
" Loss of our children," Roman Catholic complaint, 481.
Lot and Sodom, 268.
Louisiana, 155, 202, 215; illiteracy,
308; woman's suffrage, eligible to
schools, 415.
Lowell, Dr., 461.
Lowell, James R., 522.
Lucas, Margaret B., Mrs., 518.
Lutheran Church and temperance, 450.
Lutheran General Synod, 1871, 450.
Lyme,
428.

N. H., Kittredge's Address,

Macedonian Cry, 470.
Mackintosh, alcohol and cholera in
England, 86.
Macnish, Dr., malt liquors and apoplexy, 92.
Madagascar and European rum, 278,
279.
Madeira, per cent, alcohol, 12.
Madeira, European, per cent, alcohol,
12.
Madison, 391.

Mahone, Senator, on National Education Bill, 334.
473.
Mahoney,
Father, of St. Paul, Minn.,
Maine, 155, 201, 202, 212, 223, 339, 513,
534; " whisky not easily obtained,"
173; illiteracy, 308; prohibition, 369;
" not a tavern with open bar," 370;
" i^rohibition prohibits," 370; Maine
law, 1851, foil. ,iS6.
Makemie, Francis, Rev., 441.
Malagasy and rum, 278.
Malike', King of Nupe', letter, 270.
Malt, how i^roduced, 9; malt liquors
on the increase, 81; a])oplexy and
palsy, 92; prescribed, 111, 198, 199;
malts and wines, 203, 204; United
States malt liquors, 214; cost, 216;
temperance, 200.
" Man died from alcohol in four
hours," 72. England, Rechabites and
Manchester,
reliefs, 101 ; Royal Infirmary, total
abstinence and mortality, 102; Odd
Fellows and mortality, 106; Cottons, 279.
Manchester, N. H., 72, 167, 174.
Manhattan Island, 366, 448.
Mania a potu and how to deal with it,
54.
Manipulation of liquors, 11; Richardson, 44.
Manning, Cardinal, on waste, 156, 480,
482.
Manufacture of liquor considered, 342;^
to be destroyed, 432.
Manufacturing industries of L^nited
States, 176.
Margaret, a pauper, 162.
Marietta College, 307.
Markham, Dr., alcohol not a supporter
of combustion, 83.
Marmon, P., Dr., alcohol and children,.
72.
Marsala wine, European, per cent, alcohol, 12.
Marsh, John, D. D., 293, 294, 456.
Martin,
H. 143.
M., Prof., " human body,"
on food,
Martini bullet in Burmah, 261.
Maryland, 155, 202, 212; illiteracy, 308,
509.
Mason, Theodore L., Dr., Medical
Declaration, 124.
Masons and mortalitv, 107.
Massachusetts, 155, 202. 212, 509, 528,
535; pauperism, 1()1; legislature and
liquor dealers, 225; prisons, 226;
illiteracy, 308; prohibition, 1635,
360; woman suffrage, school, 415;
legislature, "Fifteen-Gallon Law,"
433; liquor cases, 1847,434; legislative committee, 453; saloons, 483.
"Massachusetts Board of Charities,"
182 ; crime and drink, 164.
"Massachusetts
Board of Health,"
162.
"Massachusetts Insane Hospital,"
alcohol and insanity, 93.
"Massachusetts
Medical Society,"'
1827, 427.
" Massachusetts Society for Suppression of Intemperance," 424, 442.

INDEX.

" Massachusetts Temperance Alliance," 453.
" Massachusetts
Temperance Society,"
18:>3. *
"Materia Medica," Stills, Dr., 12(i.
Mathew, Father, 473, 480; the " Heathen Father Mathew," 274; Bishop
Ireland the " Father Mathew of
America," 473.
Maurice of Hesse against intoxication,
292.
Mauritius, 278, 279, 280.
May, Samuel J., Rev., 40.
Mcli^rary, J. T., Rev., 465.
McDowell, Mrs. General, W. C. T. U.,
50;;.
McGregor, J., Sir, on alcohol, 120.
Mcintosh, African rum traffic, 270.
McLeod, Professor, on alcoliol, 120.
McNeill, George E., wa.ges, 181.
McRae, Arctic use of alcohol destructive, 82.
Medical Declarations: of Great Britain
and America, 119, foil. ; Englisli, on
alcohol,
"English,
alct)hol, 1847,1839,
Hit;11!>;
English,
on on
alcohol,
1871, 1-20; Montreal, on alcohol,
1873, 121; international, on alcoliol,
Philadelphia, 187(i, 121; on alcohol,
New York, Brooklyn, 122.
Medical pres^, 245.
Medical profession responsible for
intemperance, 428.
Medical us o of alcohol a concession to
prejudice, 135.
Medicine, tlie most beneficial science,
Kj; a free art, 127 ; medicine defined
by Webster, Worcester, Dunglison,
64; medicines defined, Prof. H. N.
Ma"tin, 143.
Mei.jerlielm, Andersson, Madam, of
Sweden, 518.
Melbourne, 281.
Merrifk, Mrs. Judge E. T., President
W. C. T. U.Louisiana, 520; portrait,
310.
Merriweather, Mrs., W. C. T. U.,
520.
Metcalfe, "William, Rev., 459.
Methodism, Auierican, began as total
abstinence society, 443.
Metliodist Eoiscopal Church and temperaTic?, 443, 4')7.
M tho.list. North, 1844, 445.
Method;st pa'^tor in Japan, 264.
Methodist Protestant Church and temperance, 453.
Methodist, South, 1814, 445, 469.
Motschelich, alcohol as poison, 137.
Mexico, 250.
Michigm, 1.35. 202; liquor traflBc, 212;
illiter.icy, .'iOS; woman snifrage, 414;
woman suffrag!^ school, 415. "
" Michigan Board of Health," 224.
Middle Ages, pestilcnc", 2()6.
Milam, Kipo (Mr. Paul), 271.
Millemiiu'.n, the hope and faith,
285, 417; not vet come, 413.
Mill-r,
511. Emily Huntington ,W. C. T.U.,
Miller, Professor, on alcohol, 120.
Miller, Senator, of New York, 312; on
National Education Bill, 334.

575

Miner, A. A., Rev., 256, 4.53.
Minnesota, 155, 202; liquor traffic, 212;
illiteracy, 308; woman sutfrage,
school, 415.
" Mirror a Friend," Powderly, 188.
"Missionary Herald," 264.
Mississippi, 155, 202; liquor traffic,
212; illiteracy, 308, 520.
Mississippi River, 380, 481.
Mississippi Valley, 461.
Missouri, 1.55, 202, 337; liquor traffic,
212 ; illiteracy, 308.
Moderation societies, Kith century,
291; Germany, 1517, 292.
Mohammed, the Prophet, 271.
Mohammedan king on rum traffic,.
270.
Mohammedan pledge, 277.
Mohammedanism interdicts alcoliol,
126; Mohammedanism in India and
liquor, 258, 259; in Africa, intemperance
2()(); " Mohammedan
who forbidden,
will engage
in rum
traffic," 427; iMoliammedanism the
moral hope of Africa, 277; and
drink, 277 ; Mohammedan missions
warring against Christian gin trade,
280.
!^[oir, John, Africa, 275.
JIolas.ses used, United States, 215.
Moleschott, Professor, alcohol makes
food last, refuted, 75.
Moloch, license, 368, 481, 526.
Monroe, A., Sir, on alcoliol, 120.
Monroe, Dr., alcohol retards digestion,
84.
Montana, 202; liquor traffic, 212; illiteracy, 308.
Montreal Medical Declaration, Dr.
Campbell and others, 121.
Moore, J. J., D. 1)., Bishop, 4i».
Moral
ft;. heredity, " four generations,"
Moral suasion and law, 339, 385, /oZi.,
399.
Moravians and temperance, 4.59.
" Morbid effects of alcohol," Dr. W.
Dickinson, 85.
Mormon, 518.
" Morning Star," 461.
Morris, J. Reed, Rev., 449.
Morse, Verranus, Dr., Medical Declaration, 123.
Mortality and total abstinence, 108,
lis, toll.; Hargreaves, 139; and alcohol, 224.
!Moselle wine, per cent, alcohol, 12.
Mothers and motherhood against the
rum traffic, 398, /o/^
Mulliall, 241.
Mullen, William J., Hon., paper to
National Congress, 164; prison report, 22;;.
Murray,anceJohn
O'Kane,
Catechism,
475. Dr., TemperMuscular excitement not muscular
power, Reuben
43.
Muzzey,
D., Prof., prize essay,
" Alcohol a Poison in the System,"
70; distilled liquors rather than
cider, wine, and bepr, 86; brandy
and cholera on Ohio River, 80; " Address," 427, 428.

576

INDEX.

Nanda Lal Gosh, 263.
Narcotics, connected in effect, 145.
See Alcohol.
Nashua, N. H., drink and crime, 167.
Naial, 276, 280, 490.
Nathan to David, 471.
"National African Company's " steamers, 269, 271.
"National Anti-Saloon Committee,"
417.
"National Disijensatory," Stille. Dr.,
126.
"National Life Insurance Company,"
total abstinence and mortality. 111.
" National Philanthropist," in Boston,
427; William Collier, 446.
National prohibition, 359, 364, 372,
538; necessity argued, 376; the transcendent issue of the hour, 449;
crown of the temperance reform,
458.
National Prohibition Amendment,
1876, 374; bill, 375; features described, 390.
National Sunday-school Convention,
510.
" National Temperance Advocate,"
488, 489.
"National Temperance Society, and
Publishing House," 441, 486.
Navy to extirpate rum traffic, 283.
Nebraska, 202, 509 ; liquor trafdc, 212 ;
illiteracy, 308; woman suffrage, 414;
woniau suifrage, school, 414.
Needham, Dr., " New York Asylum,"
alcohol and insanity, 93.
Nervous Systems, two, Richardson, 26;
and alcohol, 49, 67, 68.
" Neiirological Contribution," 67.
Nevada, 155, 202, 212 ; illiteracy, 308.
New Britain, Connecticut, drink and
crime, 164.
New Calabar, 268.
" New Emancipation," 285.
New England, 173, 281; and South
Africa rum, 276 ; New England rum,
529.
New Hampshire, 155, 202, 223, 517,
534 ; liquor traffic, 212 ; prison, 226 ;
woman suffrage, school, 415; liquor
cases, 1847, 434; illiteracy, 308; prohibition, 371.
"New
427. Hampshire Medical Society,"
New Jersey, 155, 202; liquor traffic,
212; illiteracy, 309.
"New Jersey Baptist Association,"
1835, 447.
Newman, Mrs. J. P., W. C. T. U.,
518, 544, portrait, 210.
Newman,
of Nebraska,
"W. C.
T. U.,524;Mrs.,
por^miY,
409.
New Mexico, 202; liquor traffic, 212;
illiteracy, 309.
New Orleans, cholera statistics, 87,
520.
New South, 321, etc.
New South Wales. 281, 490.
New York City, cholera statistics, 87;
alcohol and mortality, 33 per cent.,
104, 155, 202, 230, 487, 515 ; crime and
drink, 163; drink bill, 180, 187; ten
thousand saloons, 227; South Afri-

New York City, continued.
can rum traffic, 276; more destroyed
than confederacy, 361; " city of saloons," 363, foil. ; map of saloons,
363, 365; "drinkeries," Talmage, 368;
Assembly districts, 365 ; fermented
liquors, 366; " New York City rules
America," 367; "a great cancer of
rum," 367; crime, 476; statue of
W. E. Dodge, 489.
" New York Board of Health," 162.
" New
York Board of Police Justices,"
163.
J
"New York City Conference," 466.
" New
City' 364,
and 365.
its Masters,"
RobertYork
Graham,
" New York Equitable Life Insurance
Company," medical examiner, letter, 113.
" New York Grocer," N. F. Barrett,
178.
" New York Lunatic Asyhim and alcohol," 93.
"New York Medical Declaration,"
122.
New York Medical Journal Association, 72.
New York State, legislative message
of Dix, 164; liquor traffic, 212, 222,
491, 509, 535; illiteracy, 309; woman
suffrage, 414; woman suffrage,
school, 415.
" New York Tribime," 156, 157.
New Zealand, 282, 490, 491, 518.
Nielsen's statistics, alcohol and mortality, 103, 104.
Niger River, European rum traffic,
267, 270.
Nile, 265.
Nitchin, J. H., total abstinence and
life insurance. 111.
Nitrogen aliments easily decomposed,
"Norfolk
County Association," 1882,
7.
460.
" North American Review," 1875, 162.
North Carolina, 155, 202, 465; liquor
traffic, 212; illiteracy, 309.
North Georgia. Methodist Episcopal
South Church, 469.
North West Territory, 1781, 330.
Nugent, Father, 480.
Nupe', in Africa, 270, 273.
Oceanica, 281.
Odd Fellows and mortality, 102, 107.
Ogston, Dr., experiments with alcohol
from heart of woman, 56.
Ohio, 155, 202, 223, 458, 504, 505, 509,
515, 535; liquor traffic, 212; Temperance Crusade, 274; illiteracy, 309.
Old Calabar, 268, 269.
Old Man of the Mountain, 271.
Omaha, 234.
" One Hundred Years of Temperance," 423, 441, 445, 447, 451, 455, 357,
464, 470, 478, 488, 491, 496, 499.
Ontario, woman suffrage, municipal,
416.
Opium, not a food, 23; opium company in South Africa, 275.
Opolo",
" Order 268.
of Temperance,"

15, 17, 292.

INDEX.

577
Oregon, 155, 202, 509; liquor traffic,
212 ; illiteracy, 309 ; woman suffrage,
414 ; woman suffrage, school, 415.
Orfila's theory of alcohol and coagulation, 57.
Organization department, W. C. T. U.,
516.
Oaida's opinions of women, 408.
Oxford, diocesan temperance anniversary, 283.
"Pacific Medical. Journal," beer
and mortality, 111.
Pagan and schools, 301.
Paget, James, Sir, of London, 141.
"Paid
241. forty shillings to be hanged,"
Paine, W., Dr., alcohol never useful as
a140.medicine; letter to H. "W. Blair,
Painter, N. H., 3G7.
"Palace,"
Knights of Labor and rum.
187.
Palmer, A. B., Dr., letter to H. W.
Blair, and address, 140, 145, 148.
Pandora's box, 343. 384.
" Panoplist," 455, 45i).
Paralysis from alcohol, 92.
"Paris Gonstitutionel," 24(J.
" Paris Journal Statistique," 244.
Parker, T. F., Rev., 245, 250, /oil.
Parker, Willard, Dr., Medical Declaration, 123; "33 per cent, of mortality in New York City," 104.
Parkes, Professor of Nettley, and
Anstie, (JO; experiment on soldier,
66; experiment on increase of wine,
on heart, 27; alcohol poisons blood.
84; Medical Declaration, 121; India
and liquor, 258.
Parliament of England, 373.
Piurlor meeting, W. 0. T. U., 515.
Parry, Arctic use of alcohol, 82.
" Particeps criminis," the State, 3(51.
Partridge, J. A., workingman and
pauper, 157.
Pastoral letter act, 475.
Paul, the Apostle, 476; at Ephesus,
220.
Paulus Mopeli, the Heathen Gough or
Father Mathew, 274.
Pauperism, 225; in Massachusetts, 161;
and drink, 168.
Pavy, Dr., alcoliol, non-elimination,
59.
Peaslee, E. R., Dr., Medical Declara^
tion, 123.
Peck, B. D., D.D., 462.
Pendleton, Micajah, First Total Abstinence Pledge, 293.
Pennsylvania, 155, 202, 222, 458, 509;
crime and drink, 1(55; drink bill of
one county, 186, 187: liquor traffic,
212; illiteracy, 309; West Pennsylvania and prohibition, 450; drink
bill, "two educations," 229; insurance report and mortality, 107.
"Pennsylvania Board of Charities,"
162, 226.
" Pennsylvania
Citizens' Association,"
164.
"Pennsylvania Conference Evangelical Association," 467.

37

"Pennsylvania Hospital for Insane,"
alcohol and insanity, 93.
" Pennsylvania Mutual Life Insurance
Company," total abstinence and
mortality. 111.
Pepper, Wm., Dr., " Medical Practice," 158.
Percy, Dr., 59; dog experiment, 57, 71,
78; alcoliol as poison, 137; alcohol
on heat and force, 146.
Pereira, Professor, alcohol a caustic
poison, 71.
Perrin, Dr., 59, 61 ; 1860, alcohol never
food, 20; investigation on alcohol,
:35; investigation, 5(5; lessens muscular force, 84; alcohol, 132.
Perry, per cent, alcohol, 12.
Persia and wine, 249.
"Personal Liberty," 337, ;340; not to
injure one's self, 350; not to get
drunk, 392.
Philadelphia, drink saloons, 154;
prison, 1()4 ; alcohol and murders,
226, 220, 2:W, ;J67, 466,512; Knights
of Labor Headquarters, 187.
Philadelphia Centennial of Temperance, 1885, 478.
Physicians, alcohol, 71, 117, 127; the
experts on alcohol, 17 ; physicians
and drinkers, 80 ; for ."iOO years concealed alcohol, 117; should understand alcoliol, 98; responsible for its
use, 98; responsible for intemperance, 428; "doctors on tlie wrong
side," lienibaugh, 150; "should destroy the destroyer," Wilder, 148;
should they be public officers, 117.
" Physiological
Monroe, 84. action of alcohol," Dr.
Picrrepont, John, Rev., 46.
Pitt, Wm., dest roved by alcohol, 152.
Pittsburg, Penn., 230.
Pittsburg synod, 458.
Playfair, Professor, beer, 129.
Pledge,
total abstinence, Pendleton,
293.

«).
Plutarch,
" Heredity and Alcohol,"
Plymouth, Connecticut, ordination,
Ljinan Beecher, 425.
Poison, defined, Worcester, Webster,
Dunglison, 63; Professor Martin,
Poles, 516.
Political meetings held in saloon in
New York City, 366; next door to
saloon, ;366.
Political parties, 470, 499.
143. ' prohibitionist," 211.
"Political
Pombi, " Alcohol in Africa," 267.
Pomeroy, Jesse, example of heredity,
95.
Pond, James O., Dr., ^ledical Decla/ration, 124.
Poole, Dr., alcohol and insanity,
92.
Pope Leo XIII., letter, 463, 474.
Port wine, per cent, alcohol, 12, 44 ;
European, per cent, alcohol, 12.
Porter, percent, alcohol, 12 ; European,
per cent, alcohol, 12; comparison
and analysis, 80.
Portugal, wine, 249.

578

INDEX.

Portuguese, carry rum to Africa, 264,
267, 276; at Berlin conference for
rum, 271.
Post, Alfred C, Dr., Medical Declaration, 123.
Powderly, T. V., letter, 183, "which
deserves immortality," 183; speeches,
478.
Powell, A. M., editor "National Temperance Advocate," 250, 489; purtrait, 199.
Presbyterian Church and Temperance,
441; the leader, 442, 504, 512.
Presidency, India, 261.
President of United States, duty to
Congo Free State, 282.
Prevention, Department W. C. T. U.,
516.
Price, Joseph C^, Prof., 465.
Price, Rev., D. D., Wesleyan African,
465, 466.
Pringle, R., surgeon, 261.
Prison and Police Dei)artment, W. C.
T. U.,515.
Prohibition, not new, 360; not sumptuary law, answer to Vest, 338 ; selfdefence, 352 ; in ten commandments,
355; total abstinence, 439; "our
only salvation, " Rembaugh, 153; "a
fig-tree, not a thistle," 437; prohibition and license, 354, 365; prohibition in Sweden, 1753, 360; in Georgia,
1883, 470, 583; 'and manufactures,
437; prohibition prohibits, 369; prohibition national, 165; prohibition
amendment, 537; proliibition party,
465; jirohibition national, 372, full. ;
prohibition of manufacture, 378.
Prometheus and Bacchus, 2.
Propositions on rum traffic, 34:9, /nil.
Protestant churches and temperance,
441; population, 471,530; unanimous
for temperance, 472.
Protestant Ejiiscopal Church and temperance, 456.
Prout, Dr., alcohol decreases heat, 83;
alcohol in heat and force, 146 ; as
food, 130.
Provident institutions and alcohol, 98.
Prussia, 518.
Psalm
405. CXLVI., the Crusaders' Psalm,
"Public-house
triumijhant," Times,
231.
Pugh, Esther, Miss, treasurer W. C.
T. U., 515, 518, 52i iporti-ait, 523.
Pugh, James L., Senator, on National
Education Bill, 331, 333.
Purity, department W. C. T. U., 515.
Putnam, Israel, Gen., and temperance, 424.
Quakers and Temperance, 441, 451.
Queensland, 282, 518.
Quilimane, R., 275.
Quincy, Mass., 461.
Radama I., Madagascar, 279.
Radama II., Madagascar, 279.
Railroad employees, department W. C.
T. U., 514.
Railroad
U., 515. rates, department "SV. C. T.

Raisin wine, per cent, alcohol, 12.
Rangoon, 516.
Ransom, Matthew, Senator, 331 ; on
National Education Bill, 334.
Rebellion, War,
h.appily over,
Rechabites
of Manchester
andL'05.death
rates, 101; and Friendly Societies,
mortality, 103, 104.
Reconnoissance for W. C. T. U., Mrs.
Mary C. Leavitt, 516.
Rectified spirits. 111.
Reformed Dutch Church and temperance, 448.
Reformed Episcopal Church and temperance, 459.
Reformed Presbj^terian Church and
temperance, 468.
Relative statistics, department W. C.
T. U., 510.
Religious organizations and temperance, 440, foil.
Rembaugh,
letter toproH.
W. Blair,"A.
150,C,foil.Dr.,
; national
hibition, 153.
Representatives, House of, 219.
Republican party, 470, 500, etc.
Revenue, more from prohibition than
from license, 358.
Revolutionary War, 422, 510; "Common Sense,"
Rhine wine,
per423.
cent, alcohol, 12.
Rhode Island, 155, 202 ; liquor traffic,
212; prison, 226; illiteracy, 309;
liquor cases, 1847, 434.
Richardson, Benjamin W., Dr., " lectures on alcohol," 20; tribute to Dr.
Anstie, 22; definition of alcohol, 4;
per cent, alcohol in fermented
liquors, 11; distillation, 10; on alcohol, 55, 132; experiments, 27; experiments on alcohol as heat-making, 36, foil., 130; reduces heat, 83;
alcohol contains no nitrogenous or
constructive power, 33; alcohol on
bodily structures, nerves, and digestion, 47 ; on liver, 50 ; on muscular power, experiments with frog,
42, 43 ; on blood and nerves, 25, 2() ;
absolute alcohol does not fatten,
34; supplies no force, 76; alcohol en
various organisms, 29, 30, 31; Anstie examined, 22, 58; Rembaugh,
150; alcohol no good service, ()(>;
manipulation of liquors, 44; 23, 159;
" Cantor Lectures." 4, 36, 42, 43, etc
Richardson, E. T., Dr., Medical Declaration, 123.
Richmond, Knights of Labor, 187.
Riddleberger, Senator, on National
Education Bill, 333.
Ringer, Dr., alcohol a paralyzant, 144.
Ripley, George C, total abstinence
and mortality, 110.
Roach, Clara L., W. C. T. U., 518.
Rochard, alcohol i:i France, 245.
Rockland, M., on alcoholism in France,
245.
Rogers,
Dr., Medical Declar-'iticn, Stephen,
123.
Roman Cathclic population, 472;
church and temperance, ^72, foil.
Rome, 474.
Ross, Arctic use of alcohol, 82.

.79
INDEX.
Rothschild, 241.
Roumania, wine, 249.
Royal College Physicians, 121.
Royal Medical and (Jhirurgical Society, Dr. Dickinson, 85.
Royal Society, proceedings, experiments of Parke and Wallowicz, (i(j.
Royal Templars of Temperance, 499.
Rum, per cent, alcohol, 11, 12, 197,
204; "Rum and True Religion,"
529; "Rum Hospital," 2S1 ; rum
traffic as business, 339, 347; and law,
341 ; anti-commercial, Archbisliop
of Canterbury, 280; yjiracy, 540;
penalty for, in Nupe, 270.
Rumsellers " systematically destroy
fellow-men," 178.
Rush, Beniamin, Dr., " Enquiry into
Effects of Ardent Spirits," 1785, 292,
423, 424, 428, 441, foil. ; " Rush,
Muzzey, Davis," 42S.
Russell, Tiiomas W., total abstinence
and life insurance, 110.
Russia, brandy, 249; wine, 249.
Ryan, Archbishop, of Philudelpliia,
478.
Sabbath
Observance,
department
W. C. T. U., 514.
Sabbat h-scliool work, department W.
C. T. U..514.
Sabbotin. I>r.,alcolioI, elimination, 59.
Sabine, W. T., Rev., 459.
Sacrament and wine, 467, etc.
Sacramento, California, 230, 515.
" Sacred Tlurst Society," 475.
Siinsbury, alcohol a paralyzant, 144.
St. Helena, 4<MI
St. John, Governor, 528.
St. Louis, 230, 3(i7.
St. Martin, Alexis, stomach disclosed,
87; alcohol on his stomach, 87.
St. Paul, Minnesota. 473, 479.
St. Peter's Cliurcli, 474.
St. PetersbTirg hospitals, alcohol and
delirium tremens, 93; brandj- shops
in 188G, 93.
" St. Petersburg
Medical
Society,"
Dr. Herman, 93.
Salford, Bishop, 482.
Salisbury, N. C, 465.
Saloon City, New York, 361, foil.
Saloons, liquor, danger of the republic, 361, 365; political meetings, 366;
studied, 361, 483; 160,000, 385.
Samson, 381.
Samuelson,
" History of Drinking,"
12.
Sandwich Islamls, 256.
San FrancisCD, ;367.
'* Sanitary
Review " on
102.

Rechabites,

Saratoga, 193, 489.
Satan in alcohol, 447.
Scandinavia, drink, 249, 516.
" Sceptre Life Insurance " and total
abstinence, 101.
Schade, Louis, Hon., letter to H. AV.
Blair, 199. foil.
Schools and tfmperance, 302; moral
education, 299; free schools and the
republic, 302; schools and woman
suffrage, 415.

Schulimus, Dr., doubts on alcohol, 21.
Schulz, alcohol poisons blood, 84.
Schwartz, 431.
Scientific temperance instruction, 303 ;
department \V. C. T. U., 514.
Scotland, cholera statistics, 87; drink,
239; Covenanters, 468; " Good Tem490.
" Scottish plars,"Temperance
League," 499.
Second Medical Declaration, Sir Benjamin Brodie and 2000, 119.
Seel5'e, Rev., President, Amherst Col455.
Senate lege,
United
States, 179; committee,
172, 188.
" Senthiel," 199.
Servia, wine, 249.
" Seven goblets a meal," 292.
" Seventli Day Baptists " and temperance, 460.
Sewall, Tliomas, Dr., alcohol a poison
to stomacli; his celebrated colored
diagrams of stomacli, etc., at stages
of alcohol, 90; diai/rauis.
Shafti sburv, Lord, alcohol and insanity, 92.
"Shakspeare,
Shame-water,"
.'>4.'!. Mohammedan name
for into.xicatiiig liquor, 2()1.
Shanghai and English ruin, 263.
Sliepard, Dr., alcohol and insurance,
Shepstone,
Theodore, Sir, on South
93.
African drinking, 272.
Sherburne Reformatory, 165.
Sherman, Senator, on National Education Bill, 332.
Slierry, per cent, alcohol, 12, 44; Eui'opcan, percent, alcohol, 12.
Sibley, Mns. Wm., President W. C. T.
U. of Georgia, .520; portrait, 293.
Sierra Leon, 27(i, 490.
Sigler, George, Rev., 4W.
Sinifison, Professor, on alcohol, 120.
Slaveholding and Reformed Presbyterian Church, 468.
" Slaves and gin," in Africa, 266.
Slave-trade abolished in British territory, 270; Constitutional provision,
.389; and rum traHic, 282.
Smith, Andrew H., Dr., Medical Declaration, 123; alcohol decreases heat,
84.
Smith, Edwin. Dr., carbonic acid exhaled, 40.
Smith, Hannah "Whitall, Mrs., American secretary World's \V. C. T. U.,
.518, 524;porrr«//, 259.
Smith, L. O., e.x-brandy king of
Sweden, 156.
Smith, Stephen, Dr., Medical Declaration, 123.
Snell, ]SIrs., .520.
Sodom and Gomorrah, 391.
Soldier, experiment of alcohol, 66.
Solomon, 241; " Wine a Mocker," 147.
Song and success, W. C. T. U., .521.
" Sons of Temperance," 486, 492; ;ind
mortality, 102; in London and mortality, 106; diagram, lOfi.
South Africa and drink, 271, 277.
South African Church, 465.
South American States, 250, 490.

580

INDEX.

South Carolina, 155, 202; liquor traffic,
212; illiteracy, 309.
Southern Methodist Episcopal Church
and temperance, 469.
Southern Mutual Life Insurance, total
abstinence and mortality, 111.
Southern States, 3(31, 494, 509, 535.
Spain, wine, 245, 249; carries drink to
Asia and Africa, 2(54.
Spaniards, 516.
Sphymographic examination, Davis,
Dr., 134.
Spine and alcohol, 68.
Spirits, 216, 221 ; in Great Britain,
240; English physicians, 119; spirits
of wine, 11.
Springfield, Mass., 162.
Stanley, 265.
" Star of Zion," 466.
State and alcohol, 299; saloon, 361;
license, 357 ; rum traffic, 339, foil. ;
"State rights," 394; State "has
right to regulate or destroy rum
traffic," Taney, United States Supreme Court, 434 ; Appendix.
" State Mutual Life Insurance," total
abstinence and mortality, 111.
" Statisches Jahrbuch," 1882, 247.
Statistics, department W. C. T. U.,
515; " Statistics of Temperance Bureau of Statistics," 195, 196.
Stearns, J. N., public agent National
Temperance Society, 489; portrait,
108.
Stevens, L. M. N., President W. C.
T.
339. U. of Maine, 515, 524; ■portrait,
Stevenson, T. P.. Rev., 4(i8.
Stille, Alfred, Dr., liberal views on
alcohol, 124; letter to H. AV. Blair,
125.
Stimulants, "kept alive by" — a fallacy, Davis, 136.
Stomach and alcohol, 81, 87, 343;
Sewall's famous colored xilates, successive stages, 90.
See also Alcohol.
Stow, Timothy D., of Fall River, 189.
Strength and alcohol, 62 ; not produced
by alcohol, 43.
Stuart, Moses, Professor, 456.
Suffolk county, 162, 230.
Suffrage, '• human suffrage," 400;
right examined, 400; discussed at
length, qualifications, 402, /o?/. See
Woman Suffrage.
Sugar alone yields alcohol, 9; 278:
sugar-cane for rum, 279.
Sumner, Charles, woman suffrag ,
416.
Siimptuary laws, erroneously confounded with prohibitory laws by
Vest, 338 ; defined and discriminated, 338, 354, 391.
Supreme Court United States on yrahibition, 383 ; Appendix.
Swan, Roswell, Rev., total abstinence,
456.
Swartz, Dr., on Lutheran prohibition,
450.
Sweden, liquors, 249, 490, 518; Swedish
prohibition, 1753, 360; Smith, L. O.,
coffee-houses, 156.
Switzerland, wine, 249, 490.

Switzler, Colonel, Bureau of Statistics, "invaluable services," 196, 198,
205, 206, foil. ; report, 215, 217;
world consumption of liquors, 248.
Synods
458. of German Reformed Church,
Syracuse, New York, 230.
Table of Distilled Spirits, 18631886, 197.
Talmage, De Witt, D. D., against
license, 368 ; portrait, 154.
Tamotave, 279.
Taney, Roger B., Chief Justice United
States, "State has right to prohibit
alcohol," 434.
Tanner, Rev. Dr., 466.
Tariff, the defence of American labor,
323.
Tasmania, 281, 516.
Tea, beer, gin, 129.
Teller, Senator, on National Education Bill, 334.
Temperance societies in 1835, 435;
none in Russia, 249; organizations,
486; forces long a " God-insi^ired
mob," 286; temperance movement
now international, 438; temperance
sermons of Humphrey, 455; temperance education, 466; in schools, 302;
temperance education law, 305.
"Temperance Congress," London,
1886, 263.
" Temperance and General Provident
Institution," of England, 139.
"Temperance Mutual Benefit," of
Pennsylvania, and mortality, 107.
"Templars of Honor and Temperance," 486, 496.
Temple, R. Alder, Rev., 492.
Temple, J. B., life insurance and total
abstinence. 111.
" Temples of Bacchus," Elizabeth
Thompson, 219.
Tennessee, 155, 202; liquor traffic, 213;
illiteracy, 309, 620.
Territories, " Education Law," 305.
Texas, 155, 202, 212; illiteracy, 309.
Thames, 481.
Thausig, Professor, 249.
"Therapeutics,"
Dr. Edward Stille,
126.
Third Medical Declaration (English),
George Burrows and many others,
120.
Tliompson, Dundas, Dr., alcohol retards digestion, 84.
Thompson, Edwin, Rev., 453.
Thompson, Elizabeth, " Figures of
Hell," 219, 521, foil.
Thompson, E. J., Mrs., W. C. T. U.,
505; "Mother of the Crusade," portrait, 505.
Thompson, J. H., Judge, 505.
Thompson, Joseph, 270, 280.
Thompson, J. P., 466.
Thomijson, Professor, on alcohol, 120.
Thomson, A. T., Dr., on alcohol, 119.
Thornley, Dr., on Rechabites, 101.
Thudicum, Dr.. doubts on alcohol, 20;
experiments, 69.
Tiffin, O., synod, 258.
Tisserand, 249.

581

INDEX.
Tobacco at ordinations, 425.
Todd, Dr., alcohol retards digestion, 84.
" Tokio Christian Weekly," 264.
Topeka speech, Griffin, "woman suffrages, 417.
Toronto, drink and crime, 165.
Total abstinence, 287, 476; and prohibition, 4.Hi), 4()0, 464, 487 ; fundamental, 288; prevents disease, Hargreaves, 87 ; prevents cholera, 87 ;
life expectancy, Neilson, 103, 104;
life insurance, 99, 101 ; vital statistics, Rev. Dawson Burns, 100; late
evolution of Cliristian civilization,
290; Calvin Hill, 1812, 45H; organizations, 18o3, 293; Wasliingtonian
movement, 1840, 435; "total abstinence and total proliibition," 460,
4li4.

United States Commissioner of Education, 225.
United States Congressional Temperance Society, 445.
United States Constitution, 4.34.
United States House of Representatives, woman suffrage, 416 ; National
Education Bill, 307, etc.
United States Life Insurance, total
abstinence and mortalitj', 110.
United States Liquor Euquiiy Commission, 179.
United States Senate, Committee on
Ca|)ital and Labor, 209; Committee on Education and Labor, 374;

" Tramps " and drink, 162.
Transkei, 272.
Transvaal and railroad, 275.
Trimble, ex-Governor. 505.
Trudel, E..H., Prof., on alcohol, Montreal Medical Dec' ;ration, 121.
Tuml)a, palm wine, 269.
Turkey, wine, 249, 518; harem, 368.
Turtle and alcohol, 71.

Woman Siiffntge, and Senators'
names.
United States Supreme Court, 4:34;

Ulster
162.

County, New

York, Pauper,

"Union Signal," W. C. T. U., 179,
209, 515, 517, 519.
Unitarian Chtirch and temperance, 460.
" 499.
Unitarian Temperance Association,"
" United Brethren," and mortality,
107; temperance, 451; prohibition,
452.
"United Kingdom Alliance," 499.
United Kingdom and drink, 23t), 250.
" United Kingdom Temperance and
Provident Institution," composed of
total abstainers, 99; tables, 99, 100.
"United Presbyterian Churob," General Assembly, 464.
" United Societies of Methodists " and
temperance, 443.
United Statics, population, 2.50; Roman Catholics, etc., 472; manufacturing industries, 176, 177, 230; real
estate, 222; illiteracy, ISSO, t.ibles,
305, foll.\ wine, 249; malt liquors,
199; wines and malts, 198; drinks
and productions, c//«// /•<(»;, 232; distilleries, 1792, 424; drink shops and
dwellings, 2.30; saloons to population, 155; consumption of liquor,
201, 251; sales, 202; statistics of
spirits, 186;>-86, 197; statistics of
traffic, 1886, 212, 213; drink bill,
real estate and personal property,
1880, 2:^5, 236 ; cost, 178, 206, 207, 217,
480, 510; drankards, 223; rum traffic
to Africa, 276; to Congo, 266; responsibility for rum traiiic, 378, /oW.;
alcohol and insurance, mortality
rates, 94, etc
United States Board of Excise, 364.
United
States Brewers' Association,
201.
United States Census, 1860, 220; 1870,
228; 1880, 182, 218,229.

woman suffrage, 414,416, etc. ; " Prohibition Amendment," 374; 179, 188,
537. See also Frohibilori/ Amendment, National Editeation Bill,

Universalist
Appendix. Church and temperance,
453.
Ure, A., Dr., queen's physician, on
alcohol, 119; Medical Declaration,
71.
Ustick, M. v.. Miss, W. C. T. U., 507.
Utah, 202, 213; illiteracy, 309; woman
suffrage, 415.
Vale, John, 281.
Vance, Zebu Ion, Senator, .331; on National Educational Bill, .3.33.
Vermimt, 155, 201, 202, .5;>4; liquor
traffic, 213; illiteracy, .309; prohibition, 2(J9, 371; woman suffrage,
scliool, 415, 416, foil.
Vest, George, Hon., "sumptuary
laws," delinition as prohibition disproved, 337.
Viborg, alcohol as poison, 137.
Vice-President Henry Wil.son, 456.
Vices and crimes, 346 ; when amenable
to law, 346.
Victoria, Oceanica, 281.
" Victoria Alliance," Melbourne, 281.
"Victoria Life Insurance" and total
abstinence, 101.
Vikings, 43.
Vineland, N. J., no saloons, 164.
Vinous fermentation, first form of
alcohol, 2; chiefly produces alcohol,
living orgainisms,' Berzelius and Liebig, 8 ; from sugar, Duplain, Fourcroy, Hargreaves, 9.
Virchow, alcohol jjoisons the blood, 84.
Virginia,
155, 202"; liquor
traffic, 213;
293; illiteracy,
309; prohibition,
l(i76, 360.
" Vital statistics of total abstinence,"
Rev. Dawson Burns, 100.
"Voice," prohibitory organ, on life
insurance, 109, 215.
Voorhees, Senator, on National Education Bill, 332.
Wages and Living, McNeill, 181.
"Wages paid in spirits," by Portuguese, 275.
Waite, Henry
R., illiteracy, tables,
309.

582

INDEX.

Wales, " Good Templars," 490.
Wallace, Zeralda, Mrs., Superintendent Woman Franchise Department W. C. T. U., 524; i-iortrait,
401.
Waller, Horace, foreign rum in Africa, 2m, foil., 271, 273.
Wallowicz, exijeriment with alcohol
on soldier, (i6; wine on heart, 27, 29.
Walthall, Senator, of Georgia, on National Education Bill, 331.
War of Rehellion, 222, 321.
Ward, Mrs. Judge, W. G. T. U., 518.
Ware, Henry, Jr., D. D., 461.
Washington City, 283, 524.
Washington, George, 391, 524.
Washington, Ohio, 507.
Washingtonian Temperance Movement and Society, 1840, moral suasion and not law, 435; opposed legal
restraint, 436; therefore failed, 492,
635.
Washington Territory, 202; liquor
traific, 213; illiteracy, 309; woman
suffrage, 414; in 1883, 415.
Waterloo, 527.
Wayland, Francis, President, on prohibition, 1883, 445.
Wayneshurg, 508.
Webb, James A., 198.
Webster defines alcohol, 31; poison,
food, medicine, 63, 64, etc.
"We
217. have tried it — graphiphone,"
Wells, C. L., D.D.,449.
Wesley, John, and temperance, 443,
foil.
Wesleyans
and temperance, 465.
West, Mary Allen, Mrs., W. C. T. U.,
619; editor of " Union Signal," 519;
portrait, 268.
West Africa and foreign rum, 267.
West Indies, 490.
West Virginia, 155, 202 ; liquor traffic,
213; illiteracy, 309.
Westchester, 227.
" Western Brewer," 249.
Westminster Abbey, 280.
Whisky, 11 ; per cent, alcohol, 12 ;
European, per cent, alcohol, 12;
analysis and comparison, 80 ; whisky,
rye, 197, 204, 207; in hay fever, Dr.
Alexander Wilder, 150.
White, Armenia, Mrs., W. C. T. U.,
524; portrait, 250.
Whitney, Mrs. Dr., W. C. T. U., 524.
"Whittington Life Insurance Company " and total abstinence, 101.
Wifehood and motherhood against
rum traffic, 398.
Wilberforce, Canon, portrait, 27.
Wilder, Alexander, Dr., alcohol, curative effect, 148; letter to H. W.
Blair, 149, 150.
Willard, Frances E., Miss, President
W. C. T. U., 511, 512, 515, 51G, 518,
620,522; portrait, 511.
Willard, Mary A. B., W. C. T. U.,
518, 519.
Williams, Dr., alcohol poisons blood,
84.
Williams, Senator, on National Education Bill, 333.

Willing,
511.

Jennie

F., W.

C.

T. U.,

Wilson, Henry, Vice-President United States, 456.
Windom,
William, Hon., on saloon,
361; portrait, 18.
Wine, first form of alcohol, 2; " winegod,
wine cup and
wine,"
2; claim
of invention,
Egypt,
Greece,
and
Rome, 2; comparison and analysis,
80; expends power, Liebig, 84;
Muzzey, 86; raisin wine, per cent,
alcohol, 12; wine and alcohol in
Materia Medica, Stille', Dr., 126;
English physicians, 119; wines and
malts, 203; progressive effect, 27, 28,
29; palm wine, 269; Spanish wines,
245; Italian wines, 245; high wines,
197, 204, 207; production of the
world, 249; cost, 216; United States
wine bill, 207; wine drinking in
Persia, Cochrane, Labaree, 249, 250;
wine forbidden to Greek women,
96; wine and St. Martin, 8!); wine
at Lord's Supper, 127, 467, 515; 221,
239.
" Wine and Spirits Traders' Society,"
New York, 198.
Wisconsin, 155, 202; liquor traffic, 213;
illiteracy, 309, 509.
Wittenmyer, Annie, Mrs., W. C. T.
U., 512, 515.
Woman and child the great sufferers
from rum traffic, 396, 397 ; woman's
war for the home, 398; the support
of charity and religion, 408; the
educator of the race, 408; woman,
inebriety, L. M. Hall, 1G5; in intellect, eqiial of man, in art, science,
and literature, 408; in office, no malfeasance, Iowa, Louisiana, General
Grant, 415; inebriety increasing
among women, 397.
Woman's Christian Temperance Union, chapter xxiv. ; mdtto, " For
God, for home, for native land,"
299; and education, 304; and national education, 336, 408; exhibition of woman's capacity for action,
408, 469, 486, 502, 510, 512, foil. ;
depai'tments, 514, foil. ; in national
prohibition, 283; officers, 514, foil.
W. C. T. U. Home, Chicago, 519.
Woman's
Exchange, department W.
C. T. U.,515.
Woman suffrage, title to the franchise,
405; enfranchisement, 399; indispensable to prohibition, 399; motherhood a reason, not objection, 40^),
410, foil. ; " schism in families "
confuted, 413; "woman does not
desire it," examined, 412; "woman
can attend church, why not the
polls?" 410; petition to New York
Legislature, 1835, 1846, 414 ; petitions
to Congress, 416; United States
Senate Report, 405, 414; woman suffrage amendment, 1865, 416, 39(5;
woman suffrage in experience, 414;
Wyoming, Washington, Kansas,
Michigan, Colorado, Nebraska,
Oregon, 414; school suffrage in
eleven
States, 415; municipal
in

INDEX.

583
"Woman
suffrage, and
continued.
Great Britain
Ontario, Canada,
416.
See the entire chapter.
Woman's Temperance Publishing
Association W. G. T. U., 517.
"Woodbridge, Mary A., Mrs., recording secretary National W. (J. T. •U.,
515, 524; jMrtrait, 517.
Woodruft',
C. S., liev.,
Woods, Leonard,
U.D., 496.
456.
Woodstock speech of Senator Windom, 361.
Worcester, Samuel, D. D., 4.56.
Worcester defines alcoliol, 3; poison,
food, medicine, (io, (>4.
Worcester, Ma.ss, 5li8.
World, consumption and cost of drink,
251, 253.
"Worse
than wasted," Hargreaves,
150.

Wyoming Territory, 202, 213; illiteracy, 309; woman sufl'rage, 414, 415.
Xenia, O., 509.
Yale College, 456.
" Yearly fever,
meeting,'"
Yellow
381. 1874, Friends, 451.
Yorktown the final victory, 193; further up the Potomac, 246, 395.
Youmans, Letitia, W. C. T. U., 518.
Young, Dr., Bui-eau of Statistics, 215,
222.
" Youth's Temperance Banner," 488.
Zambesi River, 275.
Zimmerman, Cliarles 11., llev., drink
bill, 17'J, 209,./r)/;., 211.
Zion -Yesley College, 465, 466.
" Zouaves of Heaven," 461.

R

v^ ; „ .'S-^'s
"TheTemperance Movement

Ifoitf lid k ttomiflliui&^lnil
HEKin

^

^*- %

s /" o

■\VVA

^'^ \. C^sn

-..'t.

MAN 3. SMynlE r'P FtmUBHBRS

On the
from the ■ 30th day of April, i8iJ6, it appeared
records
of the were
Board 9168
of Excise
Com
missif.ncrs.
tlint there
Li
sell iruoxiciitinf- liquor in f'jrcc in the city
•.inc\ i>yru |.l;i. t--., by osiiiiinH;, were 'sclhllg
wliliuiu iiconi IS. Total iiumbcrof aaloonsor
plai:ciwlitruli<|iiorwasol)litinablc, I0,i68 0/
which over 9000 licensed places arc located
on thpfi map, in rtd ; lhu», ,„ ,
Sec pr.ge 363 .

<^
'^

V

J^
V-

Wn JJAM BLAl H .

\\»\

I

n

V ^A
X^ ^

^
%

c

i^'\

0,;V

^r-

V .. rJ

\

1>

Vu
\

r''^:''-^=^''!^j^'^'

t.

A^

