a

/

}
bi
4

4

td

+ ey

nSb|:

»

Po)

i

*

;:

eat
Se. 5

a|

by Se
Paks ee

:
}

S)

*
<
as

AS
hee

+
>

az Z.

~

4

‘7

mi :

T.
-d

iv

"iUALS,

ian

be aay gh

re:
tts
gem

*

hg =

an

th

ON

deyte Wegtee re ee GeGee

MASE
ONSe
Rey

Foal

=

TA

Uitoas

é
-

aah gt

-=

ae
ae
ate

ba ts

Faz
.

+ aay

x

RS

“

_

yea re

He

ke Wa
SAA
Any tag’ qt
fey hah
o> ee

he

phaiy ka,
*.

eh tyt
.
Bata bt Rh
eaia bate matey ut

-

Dry,
tA BP ee SR Soe es ees ha
bay Tag Bra Me BRR
tote

OR
AOea
a
nail
ond

Seat yt hat ghahyhcbaks
pt aytea Sng atatatgts
mpg tsghy

°

,&
-

tet
in
art
mea.
ok

a
—
_
“<

et
ce
ot
.Oe

*.

Vy
Sata
Vahets
aN
yee

4

‘es

*

OR Sy
hy
SaRS AN
mhTY) SateRAS
ter, ty

:

a!

Sle
alt
Fiat
AAy
as
a

+4

+}
‘

~

>

>|
i

S

a
|‘
|
bh

‘
‘i

;

| 7
,
.

‘t
r

. A
*

2

‘e
x

t

an
‘
ot
my dey Tet Seghc
SasToa tte
rate,
th
PASEtbe ee

eae gh gta aah
SSNS

my
TV

they sha
wie

SS
Sty
sha tne beWeak
Ste
* ‘Ss .

SRR en RR

S

AS

:

=:

=

in this book or 1

. Penalties are impo
ws of the Commonwealth

Chapter 208, Section 83.

Bish

me CEC
FROM

THE

- * WASHINGTONIAN

HOME;

BEING

¥
A

HISTORY

OF

THE

WASHINGTONIAN
AT

FOUNDATION,
HOME,

No. 36 CHARLES

AN

RISE,

STREET,

bn REFORMATION

AND

INSTITUTION

OF

THE

BOSTON,

PROGRESS

OF

THE

ESTABLISHED
FOR

THE

INEBRIATE.

ALSO,

A REVIEW

OF SOME

OF THE EVILS OF INTEMPERANCE

?

TOGETHER

Pony

IN ENGLAND,

WITH

ies

A Sketch of the Cemperunte Reform in Americu.

BY

DAVID

HARRISSON,
COUNSELLOR

JR.,

AT LAW.

BOSTON:
PUBLISHED

BY

8 STATE

REDDING
STREET.

~1860.

&

CO.,

$13, 72 L

LC pcllijre
SO,
IST coe

Entered. according to Act of Congress, in the year 1860, by
DAVID

HARRISSON,

JR.,

In the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the District of Massachusetts.

;

STEREOTYPED
BOSTON

AT

STEREOTYPE

PRINTED

BY WRIGKT

THE
FOUNDRY.

& POTTER,

4 Spring Lane.

|

TO

REFORMED

MEN

THE

OF THE

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME,

i

THIS WORK IS RESPECTFULLY

DEDICATED

BY THE AUTHOR,
WHO,

LIKE

AND

THEM,

GROPED
PATH

HAS

WAS

THE

THEIR

RAYS

FLAG
LIKE

OF INTEMPERANCE,

UNTIL

LIFE’S

THE

BRIGHT

AND

AND

SYMPATHY,

HIS

REFORM:

OF

THAT

LOVE

THEM

IN THE-DARK

THEM

TO

WHICH

THEY

UPON

UNDER
A BRIGHT

THEM

BLIGHT

CAUSED

'VERSITY, STRENGTHEN
THE

BY

THE

DESPAIR,

OF LOVE

RECOLLECTIONS
GENIAL

FROM
AND

ILLUMINED

LIGHT

MAY

SUFFERED

IN DARKNESS

TO

BEACON
A HAVEN

JOY

AND

AND

REMAIN
HAVE

STAR
OF

AT

WHICH

SYMPATHY
HOURS

FIRM

WHICH

OF THEIR

AND

TRUE

ENLISTED,

AND

LAST

GUIDE

EVERLASTING

SECURITY.

GLOOMY

CHEERING

TO

SHED
AD-

See

he is
he
o z

LETTER.
To the Rurormep Men
of the “ Washingtonian Home.”
Boston,

(86 Charles

Street,) March 1, 1860.

Dear Friends: Our little institution has just entered on
the third year of its existence; and it is with gratitude
to God, the Giver of every good and perfect gift, that we
should bow in humble acknowledgment for the gift of
this instrumentality which has broken the fetters of intemperance,

which

bound us, and restored

us again to

our friends and society. You will pardon me for addressing you a few words of kind admonition and advice;
in the spirit of love I feel I can address you without
any apology for doing so.
One thing I wish to impress on your minds —that the
honor and character of this institution, which has proved
such a blessing to you, is confided to your care and
keeping.
The world will judge of its character and
usefulness by your conduct; it is for you to decide
whether or not it shall go on, scattering broadcast over
the land its blessings, —raising the fallen, clothing the
naked, feeding the hungry, and causing songs of praise
a*

(v)

"> FF
.

Vl

LETTER.

to be sung in desolate homes, giving beauty for ashes
and the oil of joy for mourning. You are the pillars
which support this noble fabric; and like the beacon
light on our rock-bound shores to point the weary
mariner to his long-sought haven, so may this institution be in future a light to shine for those who are
seeking shelter from the dark and stormy ocean of Intemperance ere they sink beneath its mad waves.
You are already aware that total abstinence from all
which can intoxicate is the only sure foundation for you
to stand upon ; you know that one drop would kindle
a fire which would burn with all the power of Vesuvius, scattering ruin and desolation, sorrow and grief,
in those homes which have been made happy by adherence to temperance principles; not only your own
homes become the abode of sorrow, but all friends of
humanity weep, and angels drop a sorrowing tear, while
demons only would revel in hellish glee over the ruin
of your hopes and fortunes. But, brethren, we are persuaded better things of vou, though we thus speak; you
prize too highly the blessings of temperance and sobriety. I have been with you through hours of sorrow
and bitter anguish; I have seen you raised up from beds
of sickness and distress; and when

kinsfolk and friends

had forsaken you, then did the Lord take you up; then
did you, with broken spirits, promise your God that you
would never insult high Heaven by touching the intoxicating cup.
Well have you xept your promise, my
brothers, and well have you been rewarded; for Temperance holds in her right hand length of days, and in
her left hand riches and honor. You have found pleasure and strength in laboring for the salvation of others;

LETTER.

Vil

you have lightened my burdens and cheered me on in
my hours of trouble and anxiety.
For this you have
my hearty thanks, as well as for other tokens of friendship and good will. Let us go on, brothers, in our good
work; let the success of the past stimulate us to higher
attainments in the future, guided only by the lamp of
experience and the law of love, looking only to Him, in
whose mouth was found no guile, as the model of our
lives. Let his teachings become our creed, and no Lo,
here! or Lo, there! turn us from the true path of duty,

but with an inflexible wild resist the power of strong
drink; lest you, as others have done of whom we expected better things, turn like the sow that was washed
to her wallowing in the mire, and the dog to his vomit.
Remember, the appetite for stimulants is only slumbering— that eternal vigilance and perpetual warfare against
its use is alone the price of victory.
I wish the public to understand, for your sakes, that

it is no easy matter for one who has formed the habit
of excessive drinking to become a total abstainer, surrounded as we are by all the tempting allurements of
fashion and: old associations, as well as the petty devices
of the wicked who lie in wait to destroy us. Intemperance is a hydra-headed monster with a thousand
pleas for your friendship.
It comes in the mask of
kindness, and whispers to you pleasant words; it promises health, wealth, and happiness.
This you know is
arefuge of lies; there is no benefit to be derived from
its use; you reap bitter sorrow and anguish from its
employment.
You have only to fight against the first
glass. Stand up on all occasions and boldly avow your
principles; nail your colors to the mast and give them

Viil

LETTER.

to the breeze.
remember that

Be every moment

on your guard, and

‘‘ He who can guard ’gainst the low baits of sense
Will find Temptation’s arrows hurtless strike
Against the brazen shield of Temperance ;
For ’tis the inferior appetites inthrall
The man, and quench the immortal light within him.
The senses take the soul an easy prey,
And sink the imprisoned spirit into brute.”

This book is dedicated by its author to you. You
will find in it many faithfully drawn pictures, and to
many, familiar scenes will present themselves. God grant
that you may profit by them.
I cannot close this epistle without mentioning a few
names of noble men, who were the early, substantial
friends of our institution, for it is to such men as Joseph Story, Daniel Allen, Josiah M. Read, Kimball
Easterbrook, Williams Adams, Jr., and Rey. Phineas
Stow, that the institution owes its existence.
Many
others might be mentioned who have rendered substantial aid. During the last two years the institution has
brought to its aid hosts of friends, who have pronounced
in its favor, and we feel sure that itis to be one of the
fixed institutions of the State, if you are true to its interests and yourselves.
With my best wishes for your prosperity, gentlemen,
I subscribe myself,

Very truly your friend,
ALBERT Day, Sup’t.

OFFICERS
OF THE

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

PRESIDENT.
JOSEPH
STORY.
E
ALBERT

VICE PRESIDENTS.
FEARING,
FRANKLIN
MOSES MELLEN.
GEO.

SNOW,

CLERK.
F. BIGELOW.

TREASURER.
DANIEL ALLEN.
DIRECTORS.

ISAAC EMERY,
KIMBALL EASTERBROOKS,.
JOSIAH M. READ,
ROBERT COWDIN,
WILLIAM B. SPOONER,
HENRY D. CUSHING,
SAMUEL NEAL,
GILMAN 8s. LOW,
WILLIAM R. STACY,
THOMAS RUSSELL,
EXECUTIVE

JOSEPH STORY,
GEO. F. BIGELOW,
OTIS CLAPP,
JOHN

ALEX. H. TWOMBLY,
REV. A. B. FULLER,
OTIS CLAPP,
JOHN R. GOODWIN,
THEODORE PRENTICE,
CHARLES H. APPLETON,
ROBERT K. POTTER,
REV. PHINEAS STOWE,
REV. A. A. MINER,
JONAS FITCH.
COMMITTEE.

SAMUEL NEAL,
THEODORE PRENTICE,
JOSIAH M. READ,
R. GOODWIN.

SUPERINTENDENT.
ALBERT
DAY.
PHYSICIAN.

GEORGE

F. BIGELOW, M. D.
(ix)

ADMISSION.
All applications
ALBERT

for admission

should

be made

Day, Esq., at the Home, No. 36 Charles

to the Superintendent,
Street, Boston.

If the

application be made by letter, a full statement should be given of the case,
its duration, whether periodical or otherwise, the general health, &c., &e.
The Home is designed for the treatment of males only. Females cannot
be received.
Those only can be admitted as inmates who have a sincere desire to
reform, and are willing to comply with the rules of the Home, which are
such as are essential to every well-regulated family.
As the Home is without permanent sources of income, and the voluntary contributions are insufficient to meet its expenses, the inmates will be
charged a reasonable price for board, and such other necessary expenses as
may be incurred. A limited number of free beds will be retained for such
suitable applicants as are unable to meet their expenses.
The inmates cannot be attended by their friends while at the Home ; and
as the room in the building is very contracted, no accommodations can be
provided for them even for a temporary stay.

RULES
TO

AND
BE

OBSERVED

REGULATIONS
BY

THE

INMATES.

1. As cleanliness is a virtue, and as spitting upon the floor is exceedingly
obnoxious, this filthy habit is strictly forbidden.
2. As profanity is always shocking, even to the ears of those who are
habituated

to the vice, and particularly so to those who are not, the avoid-

ance of this habit is earnestly requested.

3. As the rooms in the institution are liable to be visited at all seasonable

hours for inspection, and as tobacco smoke is, in many cases, offensive,
these, together with other patent objections, make it desirable that the
rooms should be kept in order, and that smoking should be dispensed with
within the building.
4, As it is important that the house should be quiet by ten o’clock P. M.,
and as this is a matter of particular importance to invalids, as well as to
those who desire quietude, every inmate is expected to be in the institution
at that hour. Notice must be given if any deviation from this rule is intended.
5. As prayers are offered morning and evening in the hall, and as no
reasonable being can object to this feature of the institution, it is expected
that the wishes of the Superintendent will be so far regarded that he will
have no reason to complain of the non-attendance of a single individual,
particularly when he is in health and within the building. Morning hig
immediately after breakfast, and in the evening, at half-past nine o’clock.
6. Patients recovering from sickness are strictly forbidden from going out
of the house until the consent of the Superintendent is first obtained; and
persons under medical treatment are required to confine themselves to the
diet which may be prescribed. Friends of patients will not be allowed to
furnish refreshments of any name or nature without the consent of the
Superintendent.
7. Finally, it is expected that the above rules will be strictly observed,
and that the observance of them will conduce to the well-being of all

interested.

(x)

CONTENTS.
CHAPTERI.
PAGE

Antiquity of Temperance.
— Evils and Extent of Intemperance
in England. — Evil Influences of Bar-Rooms,

CHA

THR

IT.

First Temperance Movement ia America. — Total Abstinence
the Reformed Man’s only Safeguard. —First Organized
Movement in Massachusetts. — History of Massachusetts
State Temperance Society, .

CHAPTER
Origin of the Washingtonian

Society.

23

III.
— Sketch

of the Labors

of Hawkins in fa Temperance Reform. Be:
Story upon Hawkins,
tnt nat
SR

CHAPTER

1

of Mr.
alan

IV.

First Organization of the Parent Washington Total Abstinence
Society of Boston.
— Results of their Labors. — Memorial of
the Citizens of Boston for an Inebriate Asylum.
— Remarks
as to the Mode of Treatment in the Washingtonian Home,

CHAPTER

V.

General Remarks as to the Treatment adopted in the Washingtonian Home. — Action of Mrs. Spear before the Legislature
for establishing an Asylum. — Organization of the Home for
the Fallen at Faneuil Hall.
— Constitution of the Home for
the Fallen. — By-Laws and Regulations of the same. — First

Quarterly Report, .

.

my?
( xi)

. 105

xii

CONTENTS.

GORA
PT ER. ¥ ae
Opening of the Doors of the Home in Charles Street.— Sketch
of the Early Life of Mr. Day.
— View of the Treatment
adopted, as considered by one of the Reformed Inmates,
. 131

CHAPTER

VIL.

Showing Cases of Individuals who have been Reformed at the
Home, and their Correspondence with the Superintendent
giver their Discharge,
2 ¢S
<0. > S00 i
ee

CHA

PTR
Sic.

yvaee

Mhe same,

©. 6500S

et ete

Phe wame,

. . 8.

we

;

CHAPTER X.

CHAPTIR
ee

Se

=.
etal

Drunkenness. — Its Effects as Medically Viewed. — Operations
of Alcoholic Stimulants upon the different Organs of the
Body, kkk
ee
eg
- 233

CHAPTER

XI.

Effect of Stimulant upon the Nervous System and the Brain.
— Delirium Tremens, Oinomania, &c.— Intemperance produces Imbecility in the Drunkard’s Offsprmg, . . . . . 269

©

CHA
PT ER Xetas
General Review of the Principles adopted and carried out in the

Washingtonian Home.
— Plea for the Inebriate.
— Subject
finally concluded, . . . . . «J

Glossary of Medical Terms used in this Volume,.

.

.

.

. 328

ae

at ee

A VOICE
FROM

THE

WASHINGTONIAN
CHAPTER

HOME.
Il.

“* Go, little book, from this my solitude;
I cast thee on the waters — go thy ways;
And if, as I believe, thy vein be good,

The world will find thee after many days.”

From the earliest ages of the world, the evils of Intemperance
themselves.

have in a greater or less degree shown
Dating from the early excesses of Noah,

mentioned in holy writ in the book of Genesis, which
is about the earliest direct mentionof drunkenness in
the Bible, the demoralizing and degrading effects of
inebriety have, like an avalanche of destruction, swept
over almost every portion of the habitable globe, de»
vastating and destroying the noblest and best of God’s
creatures, who, made in the image of his own likeness, imbued with reason and intellect, and possessing an immortal and undying soul, stand. next in
creation to the great Divinity himself. And, strange
as the fact may appear, yet it is indisputably a
fixed and incontrovertible one, that hand in hand
with the march of civilization has also moved on
1
(1)

z

A

VOICE

FROM

THE

the Demon of the Still; and that as portions of the
earth have been reclaimed from the primeval wilderness, and the savage and untutored child of nature
taught a knowledge of the great and eternal truths
of the creation, and as the light of Christianity and
science have been shed upon his darkened way, so,
treading in the very footsteps and almost side by
side with them has stalked the Demon of the Still, to
undo and destroy what they have done. In a great
measure, perhaps, can this be accounted for upon the
principle that the savage living in a state of nature, and exercising only the mental organization in
a slight degree, merely to supply absolute physical
wants, it requires scarcely more than instinct to supply those wants and furnish those articles of meat and
drink which the animal nature of man actually requires.
His appetites and passions having always run riot, and
never having been subjected to control, he is more
willing to embrace the vices of his civilized brother,
which

are in accordance

with

his unfettered

nature,

than to adopt his virtues. Hence, like the giddy and
unthinking child, he seeks the immediate gratification
of his animal appetite without reflecting upon its consequences; and the result is, the acquisition of a morbid
craving, which in this work we shall contend becomes by
continuance both a physical and a mental disease. In
support of this view, as regards the drunkard and his
persistence in the continuance of his dram-drinking in
the very face and eyes, as it were, of impending ruin,
we shall have occasion, in a subsequent "part of this

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

3

work, to fully illustrate, and, from cases of actual
personal observation, prove, that intemperance, when it
has relapsed into habitual drunkenness, is as much
a physical ailment as small-pox or putrid fever. But
we are anticipating. To trace back the antiquity of
the Temperance movement would be a task unnecessary and useless, and even beyond the contemplated
limits of the present work ; for in the remotest ages
can be found friends of Temperance, and authors and
poets who have written and sung its praises.
Without contradiction, then, in every age of the
world there has been Temperance, if not advocates of
Total Abstinence. In all the records of the past the student and antiquarian may find traces of the presence
of the wine god. He may trace out upon those ancient and wonderful creations of Egyptian art the hieroglyphic history of over twenty-five regimes of kings, all
of whom drank of the juice of the grape, pressed as by
Pharaoh’s butler into the goblet at the festive board;
or he may read in the legendary poetry of the old
Grecian minstrels the sentiments of that period ; or
he may see how Buddha was promulgating to the
vast hordes of the East his special law, “Obey the
truth, and walk steadily in the path of purity, and
drink not of liquors that disturb the reason;”’ while
again he can turn to the Koran of Mahomet, and
learn how his followers are taught to eschew the beyerage of the Frank, that utter abomination to all the
faithful; while, looking to holy writ, he can find in the

writings of the inspired prophet, whose tones, like the

4

-A VOICE

FROM

THE

rolling of the distant thunder, through the ages of
the past still echoing upon the present, fall solemnly upon the ear, proclaiming, “* Woe unto them
that follow strong drink, that continue until night,
till wine inflame them.
Woe unto them that are
mighty to drink wine, that have strength to mingle
strong drink.’”? Or he may linger before the door of
Hpicurus, and there read, ‘‘ Passenger, here thou wilt
find good entertainment; it is here that pleasure is
esteemed the sovereign good.
The master will receive thee courteously. But mark; thou must expect
only a piece of bread and thy fill of water.
Here
hunger is not provoked, but satisfied; thirst is not
excited, but quenched.”
While in the poetic lays of
Homer we find in regard to wine the following lines:
“‘ Far hence be Bacchus’s gifts!” the chief rejoined;
‘‘Inflaming wine, pernicious to mankind,

Unnerves the limbs and dulls the noble mind.”

Iliad, b. 6, 1. 322.

Yet not to the ancients alone was Intemperance
known and felt to be a curse. Modern England does
not belie her lineage. With all their laws and boasted
institutions, the Saxon race were proverbially a drunken.
and dissolute one; their favorite beverage in the earliest
times being ale or mead, as it was called. As early
as in the year 694, so important a luxury was this
peculiar drink considered, that Ine, king of the Saxons
of the West, imposed a tax of twelve ambers of ale to
be paid annually to him by every subject who was the
possessor of ten hides of land. In the reign of Edgar,

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

7

in 958, intemperance had attained such a fearful foothold that it induced that king to make repeated efforts
to check its progress; and in Dorsetshire may yet be
seen a vessel, the side of which is marked off with pegs,
at regular distances from each other, which, as the
legend goes, restricted each guest in the quantity of
his potations,—
each individual only being allowed to
drink as much of the contents as was contained between
the pegs. Acting upon the suggestionof the Archbishop of Canterbury of that period, King Edgar forcibly abolished all alehouses, excepting one in every
village or small town; thus affording an early evidence of the attempt of legal authority to suppress
the traffic in strong drink. Yet the historian tells us
that, even at that period, in the midst of selfish and
vicious indulgence, many of the clergy, and— wonderful to relate!—-even numbers of the laity, were
sober and temperate people, and pleasing in the sight

of God.

,

But by the time of Henry the Second, according to
Peter of Blois, “‘ evil communications had corrupted
good manners.”
The revival of laws against drinking beyond the pegs, which, we believe, was specially
directed against the rural clergy, again was directed
to the prevailing vices of the people. It became so far
a public danger as to gain the attention and excite
the alarm and fear of strangers as to what its ultimate
consequences might be; and the language of a noted
person of that time was, that the two greatest inconveniences of London were the foolish habit of excessive
1*

6

A VOICE

FROM

THE

drinking, by some silly people, and the frequent fires
which occurred in the city.
From the period of Magna Charta, we have no difficulty in tracing out the various acts of legislative
reform directed by Parliament against the traffic in
strong drink, and bearing upon the subject of intemperance ; and,

indeed,

that

subject

alone

seems

to have given more trouble to that legislative body
than all the other affairs of the nation combined, both
domestic and foreign, as nearly five hundred legislative enactments upon that subject show. By an act
of Henry the Third, the price of ale was first fixed by
act of Parliament.
It was by that statuteto be fixed
and regulated according to the price of corn; and in
that time, every dealer in wine, ale, or victuals was

entirely disqualified from holding any office of judicial
or executive character. This law remained in full force
and virtue until the time of Henry the Highth.
Sufficient evidences may be found in early statutes
showing that the traffic in strong drink had, long previous to legislative enactment, been under wholesome
and stringent regulations.
In the commentaries of
Sir William Blackstone, the great writer on English
elementary law, the king’s license is frequently mentioned ; and an early statute of Edward the Third
provides that the ‘“‘ mayor and aldermen may rule
and redress the wrongs of fleshers, fishers, and poulterers, as they do of those that sell ale and wine.”
But notwithstanding these regulations, taverns or inns
soon became very troublesome, and landlords became

“yl pea

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

familiar with the tricks of the trade.

_

%

In the reign of

Edward the Third we find a statute to the following
effect: ‘“‘ Because there be more taverns in the realm
than there were wont to be, selling as well corrupt
wines as wholesome,” and prescribing as a penalty,
not only the closing of the tavern door, but the destruction of the liquor and the vessels containing it.
The reader cannot fail to see here a singular coincidence between these acts and the modern legislation in some of the New England States, in the
prohibitory measures taken in regulating the sale and
use of alcoholic stimulants, particularly in Maine and
Massachusetts.
The efficacy of these legislative restrictions, and their effect upon the community in
eradicating the bane of intemperance, and extirpating
the evil, we shall have occasion hereafter to discuss
when we come to speak of intemperance, or rather
fixed and habitual inebriety and drunkenness, as a
physical and mental disease, controlling the animal
functions in similar manner as other bodily ailments.
The struggles for supremacy and dominion between
the white and red roses were any thing but favorable
to the establishment of domestic morality; affording,
as they did, abundant opportunities for the landlords
and publicans to ply their avocations and push their
infamous trade. ‘They seemed, like many of our more
modern hosts, to have been possessed of the secret of
acquiring possession of the guests, goods, and chattels;
for we find, in the reign of Henry the Sixth, a statute
especially directed against this kind of dealing; and

8

A VOICE

FROM

THE

a curious statute, in the reign of that king, declares that
no person having ale or beer in Kent, to be sold, shall,
during five years, make above one hundred quarters

of malt to his own

use.

One

of the earliest legal

writers of England says that the common people of that
period never ventured to drink water except for penance; while even the churches were used as places for
holding drunken and licentious orgies, and the sacred
vessels performed their part in the debaucheries of the
times, which were denominated as “ glutton masses.”
The revolution which terminated the contest between
the houses of York and Lancaster, and which placed
Henry the Seventh on the throne of England, left the
country in a more disorganized state than before. In
that king’s reign is found a statute providing for. the
regulation of ale-selling, and taking recognizance or
sureties for the good behavior of those engaged in
that trade. But the mischief soon increased to such
a degree as to necessitate the enactment of statutes in
regard to the sale of stimulants; not as a matter of
revenue, but for social protection to the community
at large.
|
In the reign of Edward the Sixth, in the year
1552, we find the first legal provision as to the granting of licenses by the magistrates, and its preamble
runs about thus: ‘ Forasmuch as intolerable hurts
and troubles to the commonwealth of the realm doth
daily grow and increase, through such abuses and disorders as are caused and had in common alehouses
and other houses called tippling-houses,”’ &c., and it

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

9

therefore vested in the justices of the peace the power
of issuing and granting licenses for the sale and traffic
in ale and beer under certain restrictions. The mischief, however, was found not to be confined to alehouses alone, but the inns and taverns established for

the accommodation of travellers came in for their share
of contribution to the general depravity. <A statute
was therefore enacted for the “ avoidance of the many
inconveniences, much evil rule, and common resort of
misruled people used and frequented in many taverns
newly set up in very great numbers in back lanes,
corners, and suspicious places within the city of London and in divers other towns and villages within this
realm.’ It provided that no wine should be sold without a license, and that no license should be granted
excepting in cities, boroughs, or market towns; and in
the boroughs and towns the number was in no case
to exceed two, yet in considerable cities the number
might be increased to four. London was permitted
forty, York eight, Bristol six, and Westminster three.
In no case, however, was any wine to be sold or drank
upon the premises.
How closely, and in fact how
exactly, does that clause in the old English statute
remind us of the prohibitory section embodied in the
grocers’ license to sell spirituous liquors as it is now
granted by the excise commissioners in the State of
New York !
But all these parliamentary restrictions signally failed,
and at the close of the reign of Elizabeth drunkenness
and disorder had increased to a fearful degree; and

10

A VOICE

FROM

THE

crime, in the time of Henry, the Highth, had reached
to such a frightful extent that historians have computed that seventy-two thousand criminals expiated’
their offences by death during his reign alone; and
it is said that three or four hundred drunken vaga-

bonds annually suffered at the hands of the public
executioner during the latter years of the reign of
Queen Elizabeth.
The debauchery and excessive use
of drink became enormous.
Ales, called double and
single, and a particular kind, on account of its greater
exhilarating properties, called ‘“ dagger,’ > was the constant beverage ; but the kind most sought after was
called “ huff cap,” ‘mad dog,” and ‘ dragon’s blood.”
** Never,” says a celebrated writer, in speaking of those
times, ‘did Romulus and Remus suck their she-wolf
with such eager and sharp devotion as these men did
at ale and huff cap, till they were as red as cocks and
little wiser than their combs.”
We can find, by statistical record, that no less than thirty thousand tuns of
foreign wines were annually imported into England
at this time. No wonder then that dropsy, gout, and
apoplexy began to make their appearance and commence
to scourge these votaries of Bacchus!
Yet, not satisfied with the present state of things, and to supply the
rapidly increasing demand, the Irish established and
commenced the distillation of whiskey in Pembrokeshire, but were for a time compelled to suspend their
operations, through an act of Parliament, which restrained the licensed making of malt. This, however,
did not remain in force, it being repealed in 1698;

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

mea

ti

again giving full scope to the whiskey distillers’ operations.
The state of the public morals is apparent, at the
close of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, from the cager
haste displayed by the first Parliament in her successor’s reign to enact some statute to abate and suppress the evil; and almost the first act passed was
to restrain the inordinate haunting and tippling in
inns, alehouses, and victualling-houses, the preamble
of which is in the following words: ‘ Whereas, the
ancient true and principal use of inns, alehouses, and
other victualling-houses was for the receipt, relief, and
lodging of wayfarers travelling from place to place,
and for the supply of the wants of such people as are
not able by greater quantities to make their provisions
of victuals, and are not meant for the entertainment
and harboring of lewd and idle people to spend and
consume their money and their time.”
This act, in
its embodiment, provides for the infliction of a punish.
ment on any publican or landlord, or any keeper of
any house of entertainment or inn, of a fine of ten
shillings, for suffering or permitting any inhabitant to
remain and tipple within his house; and the churchwardens and constables were compelled to see the act
enforced, under a penalty of forty shillings, which, in
default thereof, they were compelled to pay into the
treasury for the use and benefit of the poor of their
district. These provisions were absolutely necessary to
restrain the depravity and licentiousness of the times.
The court of James the First was in a most abominable

12

A VOICE

FROM

THE

condition, and the courtiers and attendants revelled
in every species and description of lewd and unholy
delight.
Maids of honor haunted the taverns, and
could be seen at any time intoxicated and rioting with
the lowest and vilest companions, while the subjects
of the debauched king gave themselves up to the lewd
abominations which surrounded them on every side,
_ and which were daily enacted before their eyes by their
superiors as an example for them to profit by. All
the previously enacted statutes and existing laws in
regard to alehouses and taverns, and in fact all restrictions of a legal character in relation to the manufacture and sale of liquors, were totally disregarded.
The king himself, violating all law and parliamentary
statute, assumed the prerogative of granting licenses,
and pocketing the fees. The result of such a monopoly
soon became apparent. A distinguished member of
Parliament describes its operations in Bath to be an
increase of more than double the number of alehouses
and taverns. At length, however, public remonstrance
prevailed, and the king was compelled to yield and
permit the granting of licenses to remain solely in the
hands of the justices, as formerly. Soon after Parliament took steps to abate the evils of intemperance, and passed an act for the further restriction of
alehouses, and for repressing the odious and loathsome vice of drunkenness; the preamble of which act
was as follows: ‘‘ Whereas, the loathsome sin of drunkenness is of late grown into common use within this
realm, being the root and foundation of many other

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

13

enormous sins, as bloodshed, stabbing, murder, fornication, adultery, and such like, to the great dishonor of
God and of our nation, the overthrow of many good
acts and manual trades, the disabling of divers workmen and the general impoverishment of many good
subjects,” &c. This act provides for the punishment
of drunkenness by a fine of five shillings, or six hours

imprisonment of the offender in the stocks.
The court of Charles the First was, however, of a
much more reputable character than that of his father.
Open debauchery could not be charged to this unhappy
king. In the early part of his reign it was found
necessary for Parliament to enact further laws for the
suppression of drunkenness, including in its operations
taverns, wine houses, strangers, and inhabitants; and
yet, not deeming these penal restrictions sufficiently
severe, it was declared that the alternative punishment should be the whipping-post for the prime offender, and imprisonment for a considerable time for

the officer who neglected the performance of his duty.
But the license of the restoration again plunged the
nation into the abyss of licentious depravity. Court,
courtiers, and nobles without decency, and a clergy
without religion, could only exist among a people without sobriety. What a state of society, when even the
queen was compelled to smother her womanly indignation, and, with an outward show of courtesy, receive
the harlots of her husband!

In the time and during the prevalence of the great
plague,

the

most
2

common

complaint

was

the un-

14.

A VOICE

FROM

THE

bounded facilities afforded for the sinful indulgence
of intemperance.
It was during the reign of Charles
the Second that the excise revenues were granted to
the crown in lieu of, and as a compensation for, certain manorial rights. By this time the traffic in alcoholic drink had risen to a stupendous magnitude, the
value and stipend received for the granting of licenses
for the sale of rum alone being estimated at £24,000
per annum; at which sum they were purchased by Parliament from the Duke of York, to whom they had been
previously assigned by statute.
The leading English press has claimed it as a constitutional privilege that every Englishman has a right
to get drunk. Perhaps he has; yet I cannot but think
that the man who wantonly commits suicide, through
and by means of strong drink, is as much a felo-de-se
as the man who coolly and deliberately places and discharges a loaded pistol against his head with the avowed
intention of producing death. At all events gin at this
period excited no inconsiderable sway and influence
upon the politics of the day.
The excitement and
glory of the revolutionary movements of 1688 were
tinctured, and in a great manner caused, by gin. In
1691, a statute was passed for the avowed purpose of
encouraging the use and increased consumption of
corn in the distillation and manufacture of gin, and
advocating the increased use of that terrible and wholesale poison. This wholesale destruction of the people's
staff of life soon became palpably and apparently serious; and in the year 1700 it was found necessary to

WASHINGTONIAN

HOMR.

15

enact further parliamentary statutes to prevent this
wholesale destruction of the people’s food. In 1702
distillation was again encouraged; not, however, for
any considerable period of time.
Debauchery and
intemperance, during the reign of Queen Anne, had
again attained a fearful height, gin being within the
reach of the poorest class,—its price being only sixpence per quart. In the year 1725, the police reports
of London and Southwark show an aggregate of 6178
spirit shops,
— one to about every seven houses in the
whole city; a pretty fair proportion, affording an excellent school for the improvement of the morals of the
people, while grain and food were thus made expensive
through, and by means of, the enormous consumption
of corn in the distillation of liquor.
Things at last reached such a height that brandy was
publicly hawked about the streets instead of the more
necessary articles of sustenance. In 1728, an attempt
was made to increase the price of licenses, and prohibit the hawking of liquors. Even this effort did
not accord with the public sentiment, and these
slight prohibitions were accordingly repealed.
The
tide of temptation
now flowed over the nation without restraint, and is most graphically described by
the English historian ; for then the sign-boards proclaimed, “Here you may get drunk for a penny ; dead
drunk for twopence, and have clean straw for nothing.”
The magistrates at length petitioned Parliament in the
strongest language they could employ, and at last, in a
fit of sudden zealous morality, they passed the famous

16

Gin Act of 1735.

A VOICE

FROM

THE

This act conveys

the idea of its

intended operations in the preamble, which is as follows: “The drinking of spirituous liquors, or strong
waters, has become very common, especially among
the common people of lower and inferior rank; the
constant use of which tends greatly to the destruction
of their health, rendering them unfit for useful labor or
business, debauching their morals, and inciting them
to perpetrate all manner of vices; and the ill consequences of the excessive use of such liquors are not
confined to the present generation, but extend to future
ages, and to the ruin and devastation of this kingdom.”
This statute provides that every license for sale in
quantities of less than two gallons shall cost the sum
of fifty pounds; that the retailer shall pay a duty of
twenty shillings per gallon on his stock; that no wages
should be paid in drink, and no hawking of spirits
should be allowed. The excitement produced by the
passage of this law was intense ; the community christened it as the funeral of ‘Old Mother Gin,” but, like
a phoenix, she arose again from the ashes. The consumption of spirits again fearfully increased, and the
law was openly and boldly violated. Nothing else could
be expected. Any attempts by a sudden and coercive
measure to control a seated appetite could not be expected to be attended with any other or different
results. The mere increase of a license fee will do
but little, and did do but little, to restrain drink as

long as temptation was daily in the way; and

the

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

17

disease still remained

uncured.

was

The license fee was reduced

repealed in 1748.

This act, however,

to twenty shillings, and the number of licenses to be
granted was limited by only allowing them to be issued to those who had previously obtained licenses
to sell ale and beer. The alteration in the law, however, did not mend the mischief.
The consumption
of spirits still continued to increase. In the year 1774,
the excise returns show a consumption of 10,581,000
gallons, which, in 1750, had increased to 11,200,000.
In the course of a few years subsequent to the date of
which we have last spoken, we find an entirely new and
moral state of things. The high price of corn which
prevailed at intervals during the reigns of George the
Second and George the Third, rendered some precautionary measures necessary to prevent ultimate famine;
hence the reader will be able to account for the reason
why, at various times, Parliament took occasion to interpose and enact statutes to prevent distillation. And
during the time that those parliamentary restrictions
were in force, we find from an inspection of Smollett’s
History of England, quoting from his own writings, “that
the poor were apparently more comfortable, paid their
rent more regularly, and were better fed than at any
period for some years before. ‘There was more orderly
conduct, quarrels and assaults were of a rarer instance, and the people visited less the pawnbroker’s
shop. During this time bread was at the price of fit
teen cents per quarter loaf; and finally the House of
Commons was itself, in legislative body, compelled to
9Q*

18

A VOICE

FROM

THE

declare that the high price of spirituous liquors had
been the principal cause of the diminution in the
consumption thereof, and had thereby greatly contributed to the health and sobriety of the common
people, as well as the industry thereof; and that it
was therefore of the utmost importance to the public
welfare that some timely provision should be made
to prevent the return of those mischiefs which must
unavoidably ensue in case such spirituous liquors be
again suffered to be sold at as low a rate as formerly.”

During the reign of George the Third repeated alterations of the laws regulating licenses were made,
generally for the assigned reason

of the insufficiency

of the attached penalties. At last Parliament became
convinced of the necessity of consolidating the multiplicity of previous legislative and parliamentary enactments; and in the year 1822 passed the following significant law, to wit: ‘‘ Whereas, all the statutes now
in force for regulating the sale, use, &c., of spirituous
liquors, are found to be defective, and deficient ;”’ an
act was accordingly passed and placed upon the statute
book remodelling and consolidating the previous parliamentary restrictions in relation to the granting of
licenses, the sale and use of spirituous liquors, wines,
beers, &c., as well as regulating the mode and manner of keeping inns, taverns, houses of entertainment,

places of public resort for travellers, &c.
What are the lessons to be learned from this retrospect of the past? Should we become disheartened
and despair of ever being able to rid ourselves of this
ae

ee

——

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

19

public curse, and to break up and destroy the accursed cause in our midst?
It is most true, the
evil cannot be tampered with, and breaks through all
restraints. Punishment, imprisonment, fine, and whipping have been found to be inoperative. What, then,
can we do? Must we abandon all legislation? No;
we must courageously face the danger and commence
anew.
So far, in the brief sketch we have given of ancient
legislation upon the subject, we have found that the
remedy adopted for the prevention of intemperance
has signally failed.
The cause is to me apparent.
Intemperance, or rather drunkenness, is not a natural vice; it is as much a physical disease as a moral
weakness.
It is produced by a physical and tangible
agent; the appetite is not inherent, it is an acquired
one. No child enters into life with a desire and longing for strong drink.
|
The first draught taken into the system creates
either an appetite or a loathing
— almost invariably
an appetite; no matter whether that draught be taken
in the earliest stage of infancy, drawn even from
Nature’s fount, passing through the mother’s system in
the form of milk punch or other stimulants containing
direct alcoholic excitements partaken of by her under
the imaginary idea of assisting Nature in the performance

of her functions; or whether

it be later in life

that the accursed poison first enters the stomach to
commence its work of destruction, and perhaps final
ruin to him or her who has trusted to its seductive

20

A VOICE

FROM

THE

wiles; that draught, how, or in whatever way taken,
begins to assert its power by demanding companionship with another of its kind. Strong drink allays
no natural thirst, satisfies no appetite; on the other
hand it creates an unnatural craving. A man who
visits the cooling spring to allay the thirst of nature,
is not impelled to visit again this spring to allay
that thirst, too soon again caused to rage like a glowing furnace by the very liquid he sought to allay its
fires; but it is the peculiar fascination of the barroom to exercise this strange infatuation. It is the
use of drink, then, which is the exciting cause; the
drink itself, being the cause of the mischief, is objective, objective entirely, and the article should in nowise be tampered with. To him who has learned its
power, the motto of his life should be, Touch not,
taste not, handle not.
I say, then, it should be
entirely objective, because not subjective. Drunkenness is not a part of man’s inherent sensual nature,
or of his natural moral depravity; but it is a physieal and moral state, induced by the operation of a
physical agent taken into the stomach to debase, demoralize, and craze the brain, as well as debauch and
sensualize the physical organs of the human frame.
Let the appetite be once created, and become seated,
and no refinement of education, no charms of wealth,
no force of religious training, no position of society,
nothing which man can possess to make life beautiful and desirable, can present an obstacle or barrier
sufficiently strong to resist its ungovernable and terrific

WASHINGTONIAN

fury.

HOME.

91

Like a mighty avalanche, it moves steadily on,

crushing his manhood and person, blotting out his hopes
of happiness here in this world and in the world to

come hereafter.

This, perhaps, may not be the abso

lute result of every indulgence in wine, yet that is
its tendency. Absolute safety then to the individual
who uses this pernicious destroyer of mankind, or
who has ever used it, is in total abstinence and complete abandonment of its use.
The mischief which
attends the public house is not merely accidental,it
is a necessary appendage and natural result of the
associations and features therewith connected.
The
temptation to drink, however its sale may be restricted,
is great and inordinate. The high price of the article,
and the most stringent regulations in regard to its
traffic, may cause the desire of it in some; yet I am
firmly convinced that as individual safety depends
on total abstinence, so national temperance and prosperity requires total prohibition and complete expulsory legislative action.
I am not, however, arguing in favorof the Maine Liquor Law, nor advocating, in this work, the policy or the possibility of enacting such a law; but only as an individual expressing
my own peculiar views and sentiments upon, and in
regard to, my feelings in relation to the matter, leaving, at the same time, others to feel and act as they
see fit. ‘‘ Prevention,’ says a noted author, ‘is the
best bridle.” It is in man to avoid the occasion, but
not the

inconvenience, when

Let a giant knock while

he

hath

admitted

it.

the door is shut; he may

yA

A VOICE

FROM

THE

be still kept out; but, if it be once opened so he thrust
in but a limb, it then becomes a severe and difficult
labor to bar him out. We have so far briefly sketched
over a few of the parlimentary actions taken in Great
Britain within the past few centuries to suppress the
evils of rum drinking, and promote the principles of
temperance, in order to show that the evil has heretofore existed, and does still exist, as well as to depict
the various modes adopted to suppress the traffic, and
reform those who have miserably fallen beneath the
destroying talons of the arch fiend; and we have
selected England on account of her being the mother
of that country and people in relation to whom we
now propose to direct our attention in pointing out,
and showing, the most feasible and proper means
of reforming and preventing her children from falling
under that unhappy influence which works so much

misery and ruin upon its votaries and followers. In
our next chapter we shall briefly review the subject
of the temperance reform in the United States; when
first commenced, and how successful; together with a‘short descriptive history of its happy and beneficial results.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME,

CHAPTER

II.

93

‘Some secret venom preys upon his heart ;
A stubborn and unconquerable flame creeps in his veins,
And drinks the stream of life.”
Rowe’s Lady Jane Grey.

Datine from the period of the American Revolution, from which epoch we first trace our lineage as a
nation,
— dating our titles of nobility from Lexington
and Bunker Hill, as the proud Saxon does his from
the Conquest,—let us briefly sketch the subject of
temperance and temperance reform from that time to
the present, in order to see and know what has been
the action taken and had by various philanthropists
during that period, in order that we may see what they
have done in their praiseworthy endeavors to suppress
the evil, how far they have succeeded, and what the
general results of their labors have been.
There is no doubt
— and in fact the matter is too ©
open and palpable to admit of dispute—but that at
the commencement of the present century the habits
of the people in regard to intemperance were in a
sad and most lamentable condition.
It may, perhaps,
be questioned whether the number of public barrooms were as great then as now in proportion to
the number of people in the community; yet it can-

O4

A VOICE

FROM

THE

not be denied but that the quantity of liquor drank
then was much greater, in proportion to the ratio of
the inhabitants, than now. In those days, which we
often hear designated as the good old times of cornhuskings and apple-parings, it was considered a serious
breach of good manners, and want of hospitality, not
to offer, and even urge upon, the guest the accustomed
sign of good fellowship and kind feeling in the social
glass. The old family sideboard, with its decorations —
of the ancestral silver tankard for water, with its attendant mugs and spirit bottle, which, no doubt, had been
the cause of hastening the end of some of its former
possessors, was looked upon in every well-to-do family
as a necessary article of household furniture, and worshipped as a loved and venerated household god. Then
every man drank, and a great many women too; and
to have seen a total abstinence man would have been
to behold a sort of moral nondescript, in pity for whose
stomach the charitable portion of the community would
shudder, and roll up their eyes in pious horror, at the
audacity of the man who dared drench his inwards in
pure and unadulterated cold water. JI do not mean
to say that drunkenness then, as now, developed itself

in quite as many fearful and disgusting forms.

Yet

that, I think, can be attributed more to the class of
persons who indulged to excess in alcoholic stimulants
at that time than at the present. The young persons
of that period were reared in a far different manner
from what they are now. Their religious views and
sentiments were of a more profound and deeper charac-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

25

ter; besides, I consider the great influx of foreigners,
in latter years, to be one of the greatest causes of the
debauchery and extreme licentiousness of the present
day. That class of persons, particularly that portion
emigrating from the Emerald Isle, seem to become
objects of especial attention to the power of Drunkenness.
Reared, as they are, at home, in a state almost
of semi-barbarity,
— never having been taught, by force
of mental or moral restraint, to curb their passions
or their appetites, but ruled entirely by the iron hand

of necessity in regard to abstinence, the license afforded
by an increased supply of means in obtaining higher
wages and ready money for their labor, throws in their
way a temptation too great to be resisted, and they hurl
themselves headlong into every species of wild revel
and wicked debauch.
Yet, as I have said, there is a vast difference existing between our own nation’s people then, and now.
Think of the army in ’76 falling upon their knees,
and, with their chaplain, invoking aid of the Most
High upon the issue of the coming fight; and then
think what remarks a scene of that kind would incite
in the community now. That a difference does exist,
and that that difference exerts a vast influence upon
the principles we are advocating, I believe none of my
readers will dispute.
;
It is our province, in this work, to show what influence has been brought to bear in order to break up
the evil of intemperance; to restrain the appetite, and
raise up to manhood those who have fallen through
°

3]

26

A VOICE

FROM

THE

the means of intoxicating liquors; and then to consider whether those measures taken, and those energies
set at work, have been of the most desirable character
to attain that result,or more properly, whether still
better means could not be adopted to reform the inebriate than have heretofore been employed.
The
efficacy of those means, and their happy and beneficial
results, we propose to discuss when we come to touch
upon the peculiar mode of treatment adopted in relation to inebriates, and their permanent reform, in the
government and management of the Washingtonian
Home.
The first known Temperance organization in the
United States was in the month of April, 1808, in
the town of Moreau, in Saratoga County, N. Y. The
pledge required to be signed by this body, for full and
good membership, was a total abstinence one only so
far as it extended to distilled liquors, unless prescribed
by medical authority ; and the constitution of that
society being so radically different from the constitution of the temperance orders of the present day, we
subjoin a copy.
CONSTITUTION OF THE TEMPERANCE SOCIETY
MOREAU AND NORTHUMBERLAND.

OF

ARTICLE I. This society shall be known by the name of the
Temperate Society of Moreau and Northumberland.
Art. II. The last Monday in October, at 10 o’clock, A. M.,
shall forever hereafter be the time of annual meeting, and for the
election of all officers, at such place as shall be appointed at the
last annual meeting.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

ri

Art. II. The officers shall be a president, vice-president, treasurer, librarian, deputy-librarian, (who shall act in case of the death,
remoyal,

or absence

of the librarian,) and not less than three nor

more than seven trustees, who shall be chosen by ballot.
Art. IV.

No

member

shall drink rum, gin, whiskey, wine, or

any distilled spirits, or compositions of the same, or any of them
except by advice of a physician, or in case of actual disease; also
excepting wine at public dinners, under penalty of twenty-five cents:
provided, that this article shall not infringe on any religious ordinance.
|
Sect. 2. No member shall be intoxicated, under penalty of fifty
cents.

Sect. 3. No member shall offer any of said liquors to any other
member, or urge any other person to drink thereof, under penalty
of twenty-five cents for each offence.
Art. V. No tax or taxes shall exceed two dollars in any one
"year.
ArT. VI. Any member, on application to the society, may be
discharged, on paying the taxes, fines, and expenses due from such
member; and the society shall give a certificate to that effect.
Art. VII. No member shall be compelled to serve two successive years in the same office.
Art. VIII. The trustees shall execute any resolution of the
society as to the laying out of their moneys for the purchase of
books and other purposes.
Art. IX. The several officers shall deliver to their successors
all books, money, paper, or other property possessed by them in
virtue of their office.

Art. X.

In case of the death, absence, or removal of the presi-

dent, then the vice-president

shall act in his stead;

and of the

death, absence, or removal of the secretary, the treasurer shall act
as secretary ; and of the death, absence, or removal of the treasurer,

then the secretary shall act as treasurer; and each until the next
election, or an appointment pro tem.
Art. XI. It shall be the duty of each member to accuse any

28

A VOICE

FROM

THE

other member of a breach of any regulation contained in Article
IV.; and the mode of accusation, process, and trial, shall be regu-

lated by a by-law.
;
Sect. 2. No member shall be expelled except by the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present.
Art. XII. Three quarterly meetings shall be holden, on the
last Mondays of January, April, and August, at one, P. M., in each

year, at such place as the society shall appoint.
Art. XIII. Any member, or in case of his death his legal representatives, miay transfer his share in the stock to any person who
will become a member, and the property in such share shall be
deemed to be vested in the purchaser only from the time of such
purchaser subscribing to this constitution.
Art. XIV. Any member expelled shall forfeit all his rights and
privileges in this society.
Art. XV. The manner of amending this constitution shall be
as follows, and not otherwise:

shall submit

any member wishing an amendment,

it in writing to the trustees, who, if they approve

thereof, shall deliver it to the secretary, who shall read it to the

society at the next quarterly meeting; the society shall thereupon
appoint a committee, of not less than three nor more than five, to
consider and report thereupon at the next annual meeting; and
if approved by two thirds of the members of that meeting, the same
shall then become a part of this constitution.*

‘The above constitution was adopted the last Tuesday of April, 1808. Below are subscribed the names
of those who were the first members of any known
general temperance organization in the United States:
Sidney Berry,

John Dumont,

Charles Kellogg, Jr.,

John Berry,

William Velsey,

James Mott,

John Thompson,

Oliver Bissell, Jr.,

Abraham P. Green,

* See Armstrong’s Hist. Temp. Reformation.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

29

Russell Burrows,

Eli Velsey,

Gurdon G. Sill,

Isaac B. Payne,
Roderick Le Barnes,

William H. Jacobs,
Ephraim Osborn,

Squire Henington,
William Angell, Jr.,

Gardner Stow,

Joseph Sill,

Samuel Hinche,

Dan Kellogg,
Billy J. Clark,
Enoch Conner,

Jesse Billings,
Cyrus Andrews,
Asaph Putnam,

Thomas Thompson,
Henry Martin,
Ichabod Hawley,

I. J. Griswold,

Jesse Woodruff,

Lebbeus Armstrong,

Stephen Payne,

Joseph De Wolf,

Joseph Benjamin,

John Le Barnes,

Horace Le Barnes,

Nicholas W. Angel,

Simeon Berry, Jr.,

J. J. Seely,

Alvan Hawley,

James Crocker.

The above list comprises all the known names that
were, at the adoption of the before-mentioned constitution, signed to that extraordinary document.
Think
of a temperance society of that kind at the present
day,
— where the the members were allowed to drink
wine at public dinners, and the penalty for getting
drunk was a fine of fifty cents! Contrast Section 3,
Article IV., with the obligations now required by the
Sons of Temperance, to become a member of that honorable and noble organization.
Pursuing the views
which we entertain in regard to intemperance, as being
a physical as well as a moral disease, how inadequate
are the provisions contained in that constitution, not
only for the suppression of drunkenness, but it shows
the total want of those absolutely necessary requirements for the reform of those who attempt to shake
off the shackles of the tyrant that has bound them hand
and foot to his chariot of destruction! He who has
pursued a course of intemperance,

Eo

and contracted an

|

7)

a ee
es

30

A VOICE

FROM

THE

appetite for the pernicious draught, requires to be constantly on his guard against the insidious attacks of
the great common enemy ; and although his will may
be good, yet his flesh is weak.
I say then to the man
who has once been intemperate and seeks to reform
and abandon his former degrading and dissolute habits
and practices, the only course for him is total and absolute abandonment.
His motto must be, ‘* Touch not,
taste not, handle not.” His appetite is quenched, not
killed ; but, like the subterranean fire that slumbers
in the bowels of the earth, is ready upon the least
provocation and at a moment’s warning to break forth
and scatter ruin and desolation upon all around.
One
glass of liquor taken into the stomach of that man
adds fuel to a slumbering flame; and you might as
well throw a firebrand into a keg of gunpowder, and
expect to see no explosion, as to give a glass of liquor
to a man who has that appetite, like a vulture gnawing at his vitals, and not expect as a natural consequence a continued and prolonged debauch,
— always
excepting that the individual is possessed of means to
gratify those desires which then become, seemingly,
the chief aim and object of his life.
In regard to the violence of those vital cravings
which every man feels who has been addicted to in‘temperance, I can speak from experience; although,
from what I have learned from others who have been
similarly situated, I do not think that the suppressed
appetite rages as strongly in me as it does in some
‘others. Yet I do think and feel that if I should

wy

:

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

31

drink one glass of strong liquor it would require
the strongest watchfulness and urgent solicitations
of my friends to prevent me from drinking to intoxication.
But I have heard those who have graduated from the Washingtonian Home say that if they
should take one glass of brandy nothing short of restraining them of their liberty could prevent them
from going to the greatest excesses. How futile then
the efforts of a man attempting to reform, unless he
abandon totally the use and companionship of the tempting destroyer!
Ido not mean to speak disparagingly
of those heroes who in the old times dared come out
and advocate, and attempt to build up a new cause
which was then so unpopular. I say, honor to their
names, and honor to their principles; may they live
immortal upon the pages of history, as being the first
connected with the temperance reform in America.
It is a proud heritage to their descendants, and one
which they can put a higher value upon than the
richest worldly legacy that could be left behind; for,
when goods and lands shall have passed away, and
years upon years rolled around, they can still turn
to the records of the past and find there those names
inscribed upon tablets that will never perish, living a

life that will never die. Peace be to their ashes!) May
their rest be quiet beneath the green churchyard turf
of their country homes, undisturbed by the storms
of intemperance that have since their day swept broadeast through the land.
From the organization

of the Moreau

and

Nor-

32

-

A VOICE

FROM

THE

_thumberland Temperance Society but little movement
was made in the cause of temperance, as a national
raatter, until the great Washingtonian movement,—
of which all our readers are familiar; a movement
which seemed to rise from the depths of drunkenness, debauchery, and degradation itself, seemingly

as if the very powers of darkness themselves, disquieted with their own handiwork, had determined
to regenerate themselves and glean bright jewels
from the darkness of the past. The memory of that
gigantic reform is yet familiar to most of us. How,
with whirlwind velocity, it swept from Maine to Louisiana, from the sterile hills of the distant North to
the tropic glades of the sunny South, carrying health,
hope, and happiness to many a desolate hearthstone,
and ruined home!
How that society came to spring into sudden existence, and how it came to be first organized and
formed, we shall hereafter speak when we reach
that part of our history, in its regular course. We
shall now proceed to touch upon matters as they
occurred nearer home, and, as we believe, pass by in
their regular train with this great national question.
The earliest organized society for the suppression
of intemperance in Massachusetts was formed in the
month of February, 1813, under and by the name of
the ‘“‘ Massachusetts Society for the Suppression of Intemperance.”’. We have taken the liberty of making
many very liberal and wholesale extracts from an
excellent little work published a short time since in

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

oa

the city of Boston, under the title of “ When will
the Day come,” by the heirs of the late Dr. Warren,
who so long officiated as president of that society, the
first permanent association for the promotion of temperance and temperance principles in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as a testimonial to that
truly great and good man, unexcelled in his profession, a benevolent Christian, a firm friend, and a pure

and noble-minded philanthropist. At a public meeting, held in the State House, in the city of Boston,
on the fifth day of February, 1813, a constitution was
formed and adopted by which the proposed | society
was to be called the “‘ Massachusetts Society for the
Suppression of Intemperance.”’ Its aim and object was
to discountenance and suppress the too free use of ardent spirits, and its kindred vices, profaneness and
gaming; and to encourage and promote temperance
and general morality.
The preamble and constitution read as follows:
The excessive use of ardent spirits in our country cannot fail to
be deeply deplored by every friend to the true interests of mankind.
It may be assumed, upon a very moderate estimate, that more money
is expended for ardent spirits, unnecessarily and even injuriously
consumed, than is expended for the support both of the ministry
and of schools. By this lamentable excess many individuals are
ruined, many families are made wretched, the public morals are
corrupted, and society is deeply injured. An evil so extensively
destructive

calls loudly for a remedy.

It is well known,

indeed,

that vices, when prevalent and inveterate, are not easily suppressed;
yet experience testifies, that, by suitable endeavors, they may be
counteracted and checked. Particularly it has been proved, by suc-

Te

34
cessful

A VOICE

FROM

THE

experiment, that, with the blessing of God, much

to this

effect may be done by associations formed for this benevolent and
important purpose. From such an association in this Commonwealth, calculated to act upon an extensive scale, great and lasting utility may reasonably be expected. Under these impressions,
therefore, for such an association the following constitution has
been framed : —
CONS

TIPUPTIOM:

Art. I. The name of this Association shall be The Massachusetts Society for the Suppression of Intemperance.
Art. II. The object of the society shall be to discountenance
and suppress the too free use of ardent spirits, and its kindred
vices, profaneness and gaming; and to encourage and promote
temperance and general morality. With a view to this object, the
society will reccommend the institution of auxiliary societies in the
different parts of the Commonwealth, upon such a plan as shall be
deemed the best adapted to give system and efficiency to the whole.
It will also hold correspondence, as occasion may offer, with other

societies which may be instituted for the same general object.
Art. III. No person shall be eligible as a member who is not of
a fair moral reputation ; nor shall any one be admitted as a member,
unless nominated in open meeting, and approved by the votes of
two thirds of the members present at the time. Any person thus
nominated and approved may become a member by subscribing this
constitution, or announcing his acceptance of his election and paying two dollars for the use of the society, as in the case of original
rmembers.
Art. IV. The society shall meet at Boston on Friday next after
the general election, at nine o’clock, A. M., and at other times as

duly notified.
The meetings of the society, annual and special,
shall be publicly notified, in two, at least, of the Boston newspapers,
during two weeks immediately preceding the day on which they
are to be held. At each annual meeting a sermon, or address, shall
be delivered before the society by some person elected for the purpose. ‘The number of members shall not be less than thirty to con-

OL

-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

35

stitute a quorum for the election of officers and members, and not
less than twenty-one for other business.
Art. VY. The officers of the society shall be a president, three
vice-presidents, a corresponding secretary, a recording secretary, a
treasurer, and eight councillors, to be chosen at each annual meet-

ing, and to continue in office until others are elected. These officers
shall constitute a board of council.
Art. VI. It shall be the duty of the president to appoint the
place of holding the annual meeting of the society, and also to call
special meetings on the request of a majority of the officers of the
society, or any ten members thereof; and, if the president be absent
from Boston, any of the vice-presidents shall have authority to appoint any meeting as aforesaid, and to direct the secretary to notify
the same. The corresponding secretary shall hold such correspondences as the purposes of the society may require, subject to the direction of the board of council. The recording secretary shall duly
notifiy all the meetings, and keep a fair record of the doings of the
‘society and of the board of council. The treasurer shall keep the
moneys and the accounts of the society, subject to the direction and
superintendence of the board of council.
Art. VII. It shall be the duty of the board of council to act as
the executive of the society ;to make communications to the auxillary societies ;to receive communications from them; to collect, com-

bine, and digest facts and general information relating to the purposes of the society ; to devise ways and means for the furtherance
of these purposes; to apply the funds agreeably to the society’s
directions; and at each annual meeting to report to the society
their doings, and a digest of the facts and general information
which they may have collected, and such measures as they may
judge suitable for the society to adopt and pursue. They shall hold
stated quarterly meetings.
Art. VIII. Each member of this society shall make it an object
to discountenance and prevent, as far as may be, by his own example and influence, every kind of vice and immorality.
Art. IX. All clergymen in this Commonwealth are considered

36

A VOICE

FROM

THE

as members, on their giving notice of their desire to become

such,

or subscribing the constitution ; and they are exempted from the payment of two dollars, as above provided respecting other members.
Art. X. The constitution shall not be altered, except at an annual
meeting, and by two thirds of the members present.

After adopting the above constitution, the society
adjourned to nine o’clock next morning, to organize
by the choice of officers. At this meeting, the Hon.
Samuel Dexter was chosen president; Gen. John
Brooks, Dr. John C. Warren, Hon. Benjamin Pickman,
vice-presidents ; Rev. Abiel Abbott, corresponding secretary; Rev. Joshua Huntington, recording secretary;
Samuel H. Walley, Esq., treasurer; Rev. Dr. Kirkland,
Rev. Dr. Lathrop, Rev. Dr. Worcester, Rev. Mr. Pierce,
Nathan Dane, Esq., Hon. Timothy Bigelow, Richard
Sullivan, Esq., Jeremiah Evarts, Esq., councillors.
This organization continued in active operation from
the time of its formation, disseminating its principles
of good, and saving from ruin many who, without its
countenance and support, and its strong protecting arm
upon which they could lean in the hour of trial and
adversity, would have fallen into a drunkard’s grave,
for a period of twenty years, when, from the changes
which naturally take place in human affairs, through
lapse of time, it was found necessary to materially alter
some of the leading features of the first constitution of
the society. Consequently we find that at a meeting
held at Worcester, on the 19th of September, 1833, the
following report of a committee, previously appointed
for that purpose, was adopted : —

WASHINGTONIAN

AMENDED

HOME.

ST

CONSTITUTION OF THE MASSACHUSETTS
TEMPERANCE SOCIETY.

Whereas, the Massachusetts Society for the Suppression of Intemperance was instituted twenty years ago, and at a time when the
precise duties of the promoters of temperance could not be defined
by any previous experience; and whereas it.is now known that a
great change has taken place in public opinion as to the use of intoxicating liquors, and that this change has chiefly been effected by
means of temperance societies, adopting and inculcating the principle of entire abstinence from the use of ardent spirits as drink; and
whereas the said Massachusetts Society, in common with other temperance societies, for several years past, has fully recognized the
above principle in various resolutions unanimously adopted; and
whereas it is very desirable that a more complete and efficient
organization of the Commonwealth than has hitherto existed, for
the promotion of temperance, should now be formed,
— therefore,
we, the present members of the Massachusetts Society for the Suppression of Intemperance, with grateful respect to the venerable
founders of this institution, and with the earnest desire of promoting more effectually their humane and Christian design, do now adopt
the following as an amended constitution of the said society:
ART. I. This society shall be called the Massachusetts Temperance Society ; and its members pledge themselves that they will not
use distilled spirits as a drink, nor provide them as an article of
refreshment for their friends, nor for persons in their employment;
that they will not engage in the manufacture of ardent spirits, nor
traffic in the same; and that in all suitable ways they will discountenance its use in the community.
Art. II. Any citizen of this Commonwealth may become a member of this society by signing the constitution. It is provided, however, that all officers of temperance societies of this Commonwealth,
adopting the principle of entire abstinence from ardent spirits as
drink, shall, ex officio, be members

of this society; and that each

county society, and any society embracing a number of towns, and

4
°

]

88

A VOICE

FROM

THE

adopting the above principle, shall be allowed to send, not exceeding ten, delegates to the meetings of this society.
Arr. III. The officers of the society shall be a president, a vicepresident, a corresponding secretary, a recording secretary, a treasurer, and four councillors, who shall be elected at the annual meetings, and together constitute a board of council for managing its
concerns. Three of the above officers, one being the president or
vice-president, shall be authorized to act at any meeting regularly
called. It is provided, however, that the officers of county societies,
and societies embracing a number of towns adopting the principle
of entire abstinence, shall, ex officio, be members

of the board of

council; it being expected that said societies will furnish annual
reports of their doings.
Art. IV. The officers of the society shall have power to fill vacancies which may occur during the year for which they shall be elected;
to cause to be printed and distributed any tracts or essays; to correspond with temperance societies; to employ agents, and to take
all other measures which they may deem expedient to promote temperance.
Art. V. The annual meeting of the society shall be held in
Boston, in the month of May; and other meetings may be held
where the board of council may direct ; and whenever nine members
of the society shall, by written application addressed to the president,
request him to call a meeting, he shall on such request call a meeting as soon thereafter as may be.
Art. VI. The board of council shall appoint a committee, to be
called the committee of finance, whose duty it shall be to devise
ways and means for collecting money by subscriptions, donation,
or otherwise, for the use of this society, and who shall pay to the
treasurer all money by them so collected. And said committee
shall examine the treasurer’s accounts at some convenient time before
the annual meeting, and certify the state thereof to the board of
council, that the same may be reported to the society at their annual
meeting. And said committee shall have power to authorize suitable persons, in the various parts of the Commonwealth, to receive
subscriptions and donations for the benefit of the society.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

39

Ant. VII. It shall be the duty of the treasurer to pay all demands against the society which the board of council shall order;
and

such

order

shall

be a sufficient

voucher

for making

such

payment.

ArT. VIII. The constitution may be altered at any annual meeting of the society, provided that notice be given in one or more
papers printed in each of the counties, at least two weeks previous
to said meeting, that it is intended ta consider the expediency of
altering the constitution ; and at such meeting, or any adjournment
thereof, the majority of the members present shall have power, by
their duly ascertaining votes, to alter and amend this constitution as
they may think expedient.

In the amended constitution of the Massachusetts
Temperance Society we behold the gradual change
creeping over the people, and the increasing necessity
for further and more stringent regulations governing
the

use

of alcoholic

beverages.

At the time of the

first organization of this society, as the reader will perceive, it was considered necessary to suppress only the
too free use of ardent spirits and its kindred vices.
This was in the year 1813, five years after the first
establishment of the Moreau and Northumberland Society in the State of New York. But little change in
public sentiment had taken place in that interval;
accounted for, most probably, from the fact we have
mentioned in some of our preceding pages, as to the
position of the country at that time in regard to the

native population comprising the bulk of inhabitants;
for as yet the immense tide of emigration which has
since flowed towards the Western world was comparatively unknown.
In expressing myself as I do

40

A VOICE

FROM

THE

upon the influence that emigration has exerted upon
this country, I beg my foreign readers will pardon
me; yet, remarkable as the fact is, I believe it to be
strictly true. Nevertheless, we find in the subsequent
action of the Massachusetts Temperance Society, taken
in the year 1813, that the evil is steadily upon the
increase, and requires more salutary and prohibitory
measures to prevent the growing sin, and keep pace
with the changing sentiment of the temperance people
of the time. Therefore we see that from the first constitution, adopted in 1813, where the too free use of
ardent spirits was proscribed, it was found that in
1833, twenty years after, something further was necessary to be done to remedy the already apparent defect
in that constitution.
Hence the amendment we have
already spoken of, as seen in Article I. of the amend-

ments of 1833, where the members pledge themselves
that they will not use distilled spirit as drink or provide it as an article of refreshment for their friends
or for persons in their employment, neither that
they will engage in the traffic or manufacture of the
same.
This respectable body continued its periodical mectings, doing much good in its Christian and philan-

thropic endeavors to hold at bay the blear-eyed demon;
expressing their disapprobation of dram shops, and declaring their existence to be a public nuisance, and
earnestly calling upon the authorities to suppress them;
disseminating, by means of published speeches and pamphlets, the principles of temperance to a considerable

ine!

ia

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

41

extent. Among the records of the society we find an
item of expense incurred by that body for publishing
five editions, of one thousand each, of an Address upon
the subject of Temperance, delivered by L. M. Sargent,
Ksq., before that assemblage ; a gentleman whose literary ability is too well known and too widely extended
to need comment.

The next action of the society of any great public
moment was taken by them in 1845, when they applied
to the legislative authorities of Massachusetts for an
act of incorporation, which we find as follows:
At a meeting of petitioners for an act of incorporation under the style and title of the Massachusetts
Temperance Society, held on the 25th of March, 1845,
in Hall No. 3, Tremont Temple, present John Collins
Warren, Henry Edwards, Stephen Fairbanks, Charles
Brown, Moses Grant, and Walter Channing, the following act was then read and unanimously adopted:
COMMONWEALTH

OF MASSACHUSETTS.

In the year one thousand eight hundred and forty-five. An Act to
incorporate the Massachusetts Temperance Society.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in
General Court assembled, and by the authority of the same,
as follows :
Section

1.

John C. Warren,

Moses

Grant, Walter

Channing,

Stephen Fairbanks, Henry Edwards, Charles Brown, their associates and successors, are hereby made a corporation by the name
of the Massachusetts Temperance Society, with all the powers and
privileges, and subject to all the duties, restrictions, and liabilities,

set forth in the forty-fourth chapter of the Revised Statutes, section two.
4*

42

A VOICE

FROM

THE

Sect. 2. The said corporation may take and hold real and personal estate to an amount not exceeding fifty thousand dollars, provided the annual income thereof shall be appropriated to the purpose
of promoting the cause of Temperance.
Sect. 3. The said corporation shall be capable, in law, to receive
any bequest heretofore made or given to the association heretofore
known as the Massachusetts Temperance Society.
Sect. 4. This act shall take effect from and after its passage.
House of Representatives, March 4, 1845.
Passed to be enacted.
SAMUEL H. WALLEY, JR., Speaker.

In Senate, March 5, 1845.

March 5, 1845.

Passed to be enacted.
LEv1I LINCOLN, President.

Approved.

GEORGE N. Briaes.

Secretary’s Office, March 7, 1845. A true copy.
Attest: JoHN G. PALFREY, Secretary.

Messrs. Grant and Brown were chosen a committee
to report a constitution ; and the following draft of one
was submitted, discussed, and adopted:
NEW

CONSTITUTION OF THE MASSACHUSETTS
PERANCE SOCIETY.

TEM-

ARTICLE 1. This Society shall be called the Massachusetts Temperance Society.
Art. II. Any citizen of Massachusetts may become a member
of this society by signing this constitution, by paying five dollars on
admission, and by paying two dollars annually while he retains his
membership.
Art. Ill. The officers of the society shall be a president, a vicepresident, a treasurer, a secretary, and four councillors, who shall be

elected at the annual meeting, hold office until they resign or others
are elected in their stead, and shall together constitute a board of
council for managing its concerns.

Three of the above officers, one

—-_ | oo

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

4%

being the president or a vice-president, shall be a quorum authorized

to act at any meeting regularly called.

‘

Art. IV. The officers of the society shall have power to fill
vacancies in their number, to cause to be printed tracts or essays, to
correspond with temperance societies, to employ agents, and to take
all other measures which they may deem expedient to promote Temperance.
Art. VY. The annual meeting shall be held in Boston, in the
month of March; and other meetings may be held where and when
the board of council may direct. And whenever nine members of
the society shall, by written application addressed to the president,
request him to call a meeting, he shall call one as soon thereafter as
may be.
Art. VI.

The president, treasurer,

and one councillor, for the

time being shall be a finance committee, to accept and receive such
donations as have been or may be made to the society, and to invest
all such as may equal or exceed five hundred dollars in the Hospital Life Insurance Office ; which investments shall forever constitute a permanent fund, the income of which shall be appropriated
to the current expenses of the society. The same committee shall
audit the treasurer’s account, and report at the annual meeting the
state of the treasury.
ArT. VII. It shall be the duty of the treasurer to pay all demands against the society; the approval of the president, or, in his
absence, of the vice-president, being a sufficient voucher for making
such payment.
Art. VIII. This constitution may be altered at any annual meeting of the society, provided that notice of such intended alteration
be given at a previous meeting of the society, and provided that
such notice be published in the advertisement for the annual meeting, and two thirds of the members present vote for such alteration.
Voted, That

Messrs.

Edwards

port the names of members.
Meeting of the society dissolved.

and Brown

be a committee to re-

44

A VOICE

FROM

THE

The board of council met immediately after the meeting of the society was dissolved. Mr. Charles Brown
was chosen a member of the financial committee.
Voted, That the president, John C. Warren, Moses Grant, treasurer,

and Charles

Brown,

councillor of the

Massachusetts

Tem-

perance Society, be a committee to receive the legacy from the
executors of the last will of the late John Parker, and give the
necessary vouchers therefor.

This society still continues in existence, although Dr.
Warren, who so long presided over its destinies, has
gone to that bourn from whence no traveller shall return; where the wicked cease from troubling and the
weary are at rest.

For further and more minute particulars, relating
to this association, we would refer the reader to the

work recently published by his heirs, of which we have
heretofore spoken.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME,

ware

LIT.

eh

45

“‘The ransomed drunkard, once a hopeless slave,
_ Snatched from a vicious life, an early grave,
Once more to friends, wife, children, home, restored,

And taught the way that leadeth to the Lord,
Shall keep thy memory cherished in his heart,
Amid its holiest things, till life depart,
And bless thy name while lip, and eye, and breast,
The strong emotions of his soul attest.”

To many, who well remember the Washingtonian
temperance cause that a few years. ago swept over
the United States, carrying conviction in its train to
many a miserable and degraded drunkard, the true

origin of that movement is unknown, and the names,
even, of the men who formed the first Washingtonian
society in the world, are all as little remembered as
if they had never been. I cannot pass over in silence
this portion of the temperance reform, without paying
some tribute to tho8e who were the instigators of that
great and beneficial movement which has brought forth
such glorious and happy results, —results which we
see. around us in every-day life, in the happiness of
families, who, but for the aid extended by that society,
would to-day be steeped in the deepest misery and despair; how many a desecrated family altar that had been
ruthlessly torn down has, through the means of that

AG

A VOICE

FROM

THE

movement been again set up, and gathered around
itself warm and loving hearts that had been scattered
by the iron hand of Intemperance, the mother of most
of our human woes! How many a worn spirit, chastened in the furnace of affliction, that has long since
_ passed the barriers of mortality, can look down with
joy and thankfulness at the reformation and redemption of a loved parent, brother, sister, husband, and
wife, who, but for the Washingtonian reform, would
have perished for time and eternity! Yes; many a
disembodied spirit can, from the realms of eternal space,
sing glad hosannas to the King of kings for making
William K. Mitchell and his colleagues humble instruments in his hands for the accomplishment of that
gigantic effort of reform —a reform that has extended
far and wide, from the Occident to the Orient; from the
iccbound regions of the distant North, where nature
slumbers in the fettersof the grim ice-king, to the warm
glades and soft skies of the distant South; from where
Orion shines a beacon constellation in the Hastern sky,
to-tropic climes where burns the great Red Cross, a
sacred, silent monument of God’s charity to man. Its
influence has been felt in the wild wood, where the red
deer loves to wander in the forest shade, and in the
grassy dell; in lordly palaces and in the wretched hut;
and far cut upon the wild, wild sea, where the tempest
reigns, and the demon of the storm holds sway; where
the ever-rolling waves move on, marching in silent
grandeur to the music of the winds— the whispered voice of an eternal God. They need no marble shaft

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

4T

to keep alive the memories of the past; for their good
decds are enshrined in loving, thankful hearts that can
never die. Peace to their ashes! let their reward be
as great as the good they have done.
The organization of the Washingtonian Temperance
Society took place in the city of Baltimore in the month
of April, 1840.
‘Six individuals, who were in the
habit of associating together, were seated, as usual,
on Friday evening, the second of April, 1840, in Chase’s
tavern, in Liberty Street, Baltimore, where they were
accustomed to meet almost every evening for the
purpose of enjoying mutually the benefits which the
conveniences of the establishment and the society of
each other could possibly afford. There were, William
K. Mitchell, tailor; John F. Hoss, carpenter; David
Anderson, blacksmith ; George Steers, blacksmith ;
James McCurley, coachmaker; and Archibald Campbell, silver plater. A clergyman, who was preaching
in the city at that time, had given public notice that on
that evening he would deliver a discourse upon the subject of temperance.
Upon this lecture the conversation of our six heroes presently turned; whereupon it
was determined that four of them should go and hear
it, and report accordingly.
After the sermon they
returned, and discoursed on its merits for some time;
when one of the company remarked that, ‘ After all
temperance is a good thing.’ ‘O,’ said the host,
‘they’re all a parcel of hypocrites.’ ‘O yes,’ replied
McCurley, ‘Vll be bound for you; its your interest
to cry them down, anyhow.’ ‘I tell you what, boys,’

48

A VOICE

FROM THE

says Steers, ‘ let’s form a society and make Bill Mitchell president.’ ‘ Agreed,’ cried they. The idea seemed
to take wonderfully ; and the more they laughed and
talked over it, the more they were pleased with it.
“ After parting that night they did not all meet
again until Sunday, when they took a stroll, and, between walking and treating, they managed to arrange
the matter to their entire satisfaction.

It was agreed

that one of them should draw up a pledge, and that
the whole party should sign it the next day. Accordingly, on Monday morning, William K. Mitchell wrote
the following
PLEDGE.

“We, whose names are annexed, desirous of forming a society for
our mutual benefit, and to guard against a pernicious practice which
is injurious to our health, standing, and families, do pledge ourselves as gentlemen that we will not drink any spirituous or malt
liquors, wine, or cider.

“He went with it, about nine o’clock, to Anderson’s house, and found him still in bed, sick from the
effects of his Sunday adventure.
He arose, however,
dressed himself, and, after hearing the pledge read,
went down to his shop with his friend for pen and
ink, and there did himself the honor of being the first
man who signed the Washington pledge. After obtaining the names of the other four, the worthy president
finished this noble achievement by adding his own.
On the evening of that day they met at the residence
of one of their number, and duly formed themselves
into a society, by assigning to each the following

WASHINGTONIAN

offices:

President,

Archibald Campbell;

W.

HOME.

49

K. Mitchell;

Vice-President,

Secretary, John I’. Hoss;

Treas-

urer, James McCurley; Standing Committee, George
Steers and David Anderson.
“‘ Having thus summarily provided themselves with
offices, they next turned their attention to obtaining
members and to devising means to defray the expenses
of the meetings. It was therefore agreed that each
man should bring a man, and every one should pay
twenty-five cents upon ‘becoming a member, and twelve
and a half cents monthly, thereafter.
‘‘The next debate was as to the name they should
give their society. A number were proposed, among ©
them that of Jefferson, when it was finally agreed that
the president and secretary should be a committee to
draft a constitution, and select a name; which they
did, and gave to the association the name of the Washington Temperance Society.”
At their second meeting they had two new members.
After this they met for some time every week at their
old rendezvous in Liberty Street ; but the landlord’s
wife complaining that their company was no particular
benefit to the house, the lady of the president kindly
offered them the use of one of her own

rooms, where

they continued to meet until their numbers had increased so largely as to make it necessary for them
to seek more extended accommodations.
Their next
moye was to a carpenter’s shop in Little Sharp Street,
where they remained until some weeks afterwards,
when they removed to other quarters.
5

50

A VOICE

FROM

THE

At this time the society had cnlarged so considerably
that it became a question how they could employ their
time so as to make their meetings interesting. Their
worthy president, ever ready with expedients, suggested
that each member should rise in his place and give his
experience ; and, by way of commencement, he arose
and told what he had passed through in the last fifteen
years, and the advantages which he had derived from
signing the total abstinence pledge.
This was the
origin of that most excellent plan which the Washington Society and all its auxiliaries have adopted for
giving interest and effect to all their meetings. From
this time the society increased very rapidly. It was
proposed that they should hold a public experience
meeting, and arrangements were made for one to be
held on the 19th of November, in the Masonic Hall
in St. Paul Street. At this meeting Mr. Mitchell and
others related their experience with great effect. A
number of signers were obtained, and the attention
of the public was attracted to the movements of the
socicty.
Too much praise cannot be awarded to these men.
They spared neither their money nor their time in
carrying out the principles which they had espoused.
Many a poor fellow, who from the effects of liquor had
become a burden to his family,and himself, was fed,
clothed, and cared for by them, and eventually won by
kindness to reform his life ; even more than this,—
they supported many of the families of those whom they
had induced to join with them, until the husband and

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

51

father had procured work, and was enabled to support
* them with his own hands.

The peculiar characteristics of this great reform
were: First, a total abstinence pledge. The idea of a
partial pledge seems never to have entered the minds
of these honest fellows. Second, the telling to others
what they had known by experience of the evils of
intemperance and of the good which they felt from
entire abstinence. They knew of but one way to rid the
world of the evil, and that was to strike directly at its
root. They knew, too, if others could know as they
did of the suffering which resulted from the custom of
drinking, they would renounce forever this destructive
habit.
** Vice is a monster of so frightful mien,
As to be hated needs but to be seen.”

By this great reformation, commencing as all great
reforms, whether religious or political, ever have,—
among the people,—a class has been reached which
otherwise might not have been affected by the labors
of those good men who had for so many years been
engaged in diffusing the principles of temperance.
Resulting, as it has, from a singular combination of

providences, it is fully adapted to all the necessities
of the people.
,
By the Christmas of 1840, the reform had become
so popular that thousands had flocked to its standards,
and enrolled themselves as the friends of Temperance.
But a new feature was about to be added to the character of these movements, which was to complete this
already wonderful system.

By

A VOICE

FROM

THE

A merchant of Baltimore, who was a friend to the

cause, was in the city of New York, and happened to
be present at one of the simultaneous meetings which
was held in that city. Being requested, he gave a
short account of the history of the Washington Society,
and temperance at home. After the meeting, while
in conversation with Dr. Rease of that city, the idea
was suggested of procuring some of the ‘‘ Washington ”
men to come on to New York and tell their experience.
After his return to Baltimore, this gentleman learned
that such a delegation could be had, and wrote immediately, through Dr. Rease, to the New York City
Society, proposing to send five men, who should engage
to hold experience meetings twice every day for one
week, in such places as the friends there might select,
if privilege were given to draw on them for a sum
sufficient to defray their expenses. This letter was
promptly responded to. On Monday, the 22d of
March, Messrs. Hawkins, Pollard, Shaw, and Casey
took passage in the cars for New York, and on the
next morning were followed by Mr. Mitchell.
Their first meeting in New York was held on Tues
day evening, in the Methodist Episcopal Church, Green
Street; being the first Washington missionary meeting ever held in the United States. This meeting was
a type of that success which was ever to accompany

this new system of temperance.

The New York Com-

mercial Advertiser, speaking of it next morning, says:

“During the first speech a young man arose in the
gallery, and, though intoxicated, begged to know if

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

53

there was any hope for him; declaring his readiness
to bind himself, from that hour, to drink no more.
He was invited to come down and sign the pledge,
which*he did forthwith, in the presence of the audience, under deep emotion, which seemed to be contagious, for others followed; and during each of the
speeches they continued to come forward and sign,
until more than a hundred pledges were obtained; a
large proportion of which were intemperate persons,
some of whom were old and gray headed. Such a
scene as was beheld at the secretary’s table while they
were signing, and the unaffected tears that were flowing, and the cordial greeting of the recruits by the
Baltimore delegates, was never before witnessed in

New York.”

|

The Washington cause was now established upon a
firm and permanent platform. Already were its efforts
blessed and the good seed which had been sown springing up and giving hopes of a rich and abundant harvest. Messengers were already being sent abroad to
speak and work in the cause; and the most zealous
and active of those messengers was Mr. John H. W.
Hawkins, who devoted his life and energies to the good
work ; and to show the ardor which he exhibited, and
the assiduity he employed, I take the liberty of extracting from the Memoirs of his Life some of the most vivid
scenes through which he passed in his long career as
a temperance speaker engaged in the great reform,
and a missionary of the Washingtonian Temperance
Society.

One of the most exciting and interesting of
5*

54

A VOICE

FROM

THE

those scenes occurred in the city of New York, in the
year 1841, a full account of which meeting was published in the American Temperance Union Journal in
the month of April of that year; an account taken
from that Journal also appearing in the Life of the
distinguished lecturer himself.
‘For the past few days,” he says, “our city has been the seat of
an exceedingly interesting temperance movement.
Feeling deeply
for a sister city, suffering under the ravages of intemperance, the
Washington Temperance Society of Baltimore, consisting now of
more

than one thousand

reformed

drunkards, made

an offer to the

New York City Temperance Society of a delegation to state to its
citizens what had been effected in Baltimore. ‘The offer was gladly
accepted, and on Tuesday they came to our city and held their first
meeting in the Methodist Church in Green Street. Although the
weather was unfavorable during the day, yet the house was filled
with an audience drawn together by great curiosity to see this new
thing. The meetings have been continued afternoon and evenings,
until the churches have not been able to hold the people who have
pressed to them. So great was the desire to hear the delegates that
it was thought best on Saturday afternoon to hold a meeting in the
Park. More than three thousand people gathered around the platform and on the steps of City Hall, all listening with deep interest
to hear their statements and appeals, and cheering them onward in
their glorious cause.
“On Friday afternoon a Washington Temperance Society was
formed in New York. A large number of intemperate men have been
brought out to sign the total abstinence pledge, besides nearly two
thousand of our fellow-citizens who had never before given their
names. The meetings still continue as our journal goes to press. For
the gratification of our readers we have taken some notes at a few of
these meetings, and give them the substance of what has been said.
At the first meeting Mr. Hawkins first took the stand. Mr. Hawkins
said he stood there a reformed drunkard. At the age of fourteen he

WASHINGTONIAN

~~

HOME.

vo

was apprenticed to a hatter for eight years. It was then customary
to teach the rising generation to drink, and he contracted a habit of
daily drinking. He afterwards went to the West, where he gave way
to dissipation, —a

course

commenced

on

wine, beer,

and

cider.

Though he had been educated by a minister of the gospel, he never
once thought he could be a drunkard, yet the use of ardent spirits
crept upon him and slew him. No tongue could tell the degradation
and misery to which he had been reduced. Last April he woke up
for the first time to a sense of his dreadful condition; he discovered

that his health was gone, his property gone, his peace gone; the
peace of a family and of an aged and beloved mother was gone.
‘Neyer,’

said he, ‘shall I forget the 12th of June last.

The first

two weeks in June I averaged —it is a cross to acknowledge it—
as much as a quart and a pinta day. That morning I was miserable
beyond conception, and was hesitating whether to live or die. My
little daughter came to my bed and said, ‘‘I hope you won’t send me
for any more whiskey to-day.” I told her to go out of the room.
She went weeping. I wounded her sorely, though I had made up
my mind I would drink no more. I suffered all the horrors of the
pit that day, but my wife supported me. She said “ Hold on, hold
on.” Next day I felt better. Monday I wanted to go down and see
my old associates who had joined the Washington Society. I went
and signed. I felt like a free man. What was I now to do to regain
my character? My friends took me by the hand. They encouraged
me. They did right. If there is a man on earth who deserves the
sympathy of the world it is the poor drunkard; he is poisoned, degraded, cast out, knows not what to do, and must be helped or be

lost.

We

have saved more

than a thousand drunkards in Balti-

more.’ ”

Mr. Hawkins said, if time permitted he could give
a history of his whole course. He became a drunkard
on an article which the law makes right.
“ What,” said he, “should we do witha man who sold bad meat
in the market, or a baker dishonest in his bread?

Put him in the

56

A VOICE

FROM

TH

penitentiary. The law allows a man to rectify [his liquor]. What
does he do? Reduces his liquor so that a drunkard would not touch
it. Ifa liquor will not intoxicate, it is bad liquor; and when he gets
it so low that it is just good for nothing, then he. puts in his poisonous drugs to destroy men. This is rectifying by law. I can see the
distiller in his distillery sitting in his comfortable chair, watching his
distilled damnation as it oozes out of his pipe —as it goes into the
world. Will it fill my pockets? Will it make my family comfortable ?
Is there a being on earth whom it will bless? No! he knows there
isnot one. I have suffered from it ten thousand deaths. They have
trusted me for whiskey when they would not trust me for bread. O,
if hell could be opened, and the distiller and vender could see the
miserable lost wretches there, they would see there was no blessing
in their cup. I feel for drunkards; I want them to come and sign
the pledge and be saved.”

At this point in the address of Mr. Hawkins, a scene
occurred which possessed many of the elements of true
moral sublimity. It communicated a thrill of excessive joy to the hundreds there assembled, which has
never been forgotten. An impulse was then given to
the reform, which was soon to sweep over the world
with increasing and resistless power. Out of the depths
of that crowd of human beings came a faltering voice
from the gallery, exclaimirg, ‘‘Can I be saved? I am
a poor drunkard. I would give the world if I was as
you. Is there any hope forme?”
‘ Yes, there is, my
friend,” answered Mr. Hawkins; ‘‘ come down and sign
the pledge, and be a man! Come down, and I will meet
you, and will take you by the hand.” ‘“ Every eye,”
says one who witnessed the scene, “‘ was fixed upon the
two speakers, and silence prevailed.
Many a silent
prayer ascended ‘for the poor man, and many a heart

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

57

beat with breathless anxiety. Summoning up resolution, the man started for the stairs. ‘‘ Your father,” continues the writer, ‘‘ sprang from the stand, and followed
by others, met the poor man literally half way, escorted
him to the desk, and guided his hand as he signed his
name, and then such a shout broke forth from the

friends of temperance as must have reached the angels
above. Others followed and signed the pledge, and then
commenced the good work in the city of New York.
As for myself, my feelings were much excited, and the
scene has fastened itself indelibly upon my memory.
I
looked around for the scoffers, but they were few; and
more solemnity have I seldom seen in any gathering
except it may be ata funeral.’’ ‘The victory,” says
the Rev. Dr. John Marsh, ‘‘ was now gained. The work
of redemption among the poor drunkards commenced.
Another uttered forth his feelings from the gallery, and
was led to come down and sign the pledge. Five or six
others of this miserable class followed, and some thirty
or forty others, well known as hard drinkers and drunkards. ‘The animation and zeal imparted to the speakers
became great.”
Mr. Hawkins continued: “Is there a man’’—as the
poor fellow signed the pledge—‘ who does not rejoice
in this? What does not all this promise to him and
his family, if he has one? In Baltimore we obtained
ninety-six in one night. The axe is laid at the root of
the tree. Numerous families among us are rejoicing.
One man who, last February, had not for himself and
family the least comfort, scarce a rag to clothe him,

58

A VOICE

FROM

THE

owned in November a small house, and had plenty of
comforts.
Little children are rejoicing. A little boy,
in going down one of our streets, was hailed by another:
‘Ho, you’ve got a new pair of shoes!’ ‘ Yes,’ said the
boy; ‘father has joined the Washington Temperance
Society.’ On the 5th of April we are going to finish off
the work in our city, and put an end to the traffic. We
shall have fifteen thousand men in procession. God is
on our side, and he who puts his trust in God cannot
fail.”’
The modesty and earnestness of Mr. Hawkins in his
address, was a subjeet of special remark in the public
journals of the day.
Mr. Hawkins and his missionary brethren continued
their labors in New York for three weeks, addressing
crowded audiences almost every night.
He did not,
however, intermit his labors during the day, but sought
out those unfortunate men who had been induced to
visit their meetings, and commence their reformation.
He administered what consolation he could, and encouraged them to press onward in the work of amendment.
In some instances husbands were found separated from
their wives and children.
So great was the confidence
inspired by Mr. Hawkins in these once wretched men,
that he was solicited to act as mediator between the wife
and husband, to effect their reunion and aid in restoring
them to their former social happiness. Mr. Hawkins took
so deep an interest in such cases, that he visited different cities to search out the wife who had been compelled
to desert her once happy home.
We select one among

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

59

. the many instances that came to his knowledge. Among
the miserable inebriates snatched, as thousands were,
from the depths of degradation and wretchedness, was
James McC., once in the enjoyment of the society of a
loved partner.
The fiend of inebriation had entered
their once happy home, and drove from his bosom his
companion, the sharer of his joys and sorrows.
‘To
escape the miseries of her situation, and to save her scattered offspring, she had gone to a distant city in search
of employment to procure the means of her support.
This was in 1840. Mr. Hawkins learned these unhappy
circumstances from the now rescued man, and advising
him to industrious habits, set himself immediately about
the restoration of the scattered family to the enjoyments
ofhome.
The wife had left her husband in utter hopelessness of ever witnessing his reformation; dark despair
seemed to have thrown its pall over her heart.
It was in this state of feeling that Mr. Hawkins found
her in the city of B., toiling at some menial service
for her loved ones at her side. The history of her husband’s reformation was joyous news, told to her by a:
heart that yearned over her with compassionate sorrow.
She believed his words, and consented to return to the
deserted home and to the renovated husband. O, who
can tell the joy of such a meeting, and the emotions of
pleasure which must have thrilled the bosom of their
benefactor!
He left them, but not to forget them; this
he never did. He lived to witness their restoration to
social happiness, to society, and to the church; the
father walking in company with his family, Sabbath after

60

’ A VOICE

FROM

THE

Sabbath, to the sacred portals of God’s house. As years
rolled on he continued to prosper in business, and there
were added to his circle of loved ones two babes, one of
whom was called Hannah Hawkins, and the son, John
Hawkins.
Could they have given him more gratifying
tokens of their love and gratitude? Mr. Hawkins enjoyed the fruit of his labor before he passed to his
reward on high. On his return from Vermont in July

last (1858), he stopped for a night and a day in the city
of New York.
On the morning after his arrival he proceeded with his wife and daughter Hannah to the residence of Mr. James McC., and had the pleasure of
dining with them. Little did they think that they should
see his face no more.
During the stay of Mr. Hawkins and his companions
in New York the interest in the meetings were unabated ; over two thousand

five hundred were induced

to sign the pledge, many of whom were confirmed
drunkards.
An impulse was given to the cause which
soon spread to all parts of the country, and invita-tions for the services of these novel reformers came
from the north, south, east, and west. These labors
over, Mr. Hawkins returned to Baltimore, to be present
at the anniversary of the founding of the Washington
Temperance Society, to take place on the 5th of April.
On this occasion six thousand individuals walked in procession with banners and music. ‘There was indeed a
great triumph for the cause of temperance in Baltimore.

It was said that during six months of 1841 the whiskey
inspection for the city of Baltimore alone had fallen

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

61

short of those of the preceding six months in 1840, by
four hundred and five thousand five hundred and eighty-two gallons, being a decrease of twenty-five per cent.
The number of licenses granted in 1841 for the same
place was less than that of the former year by one hundred and sixty-six.
Through scenes lke these did Hawkins, the great
missionary and apostle of temperance, successively pass
in his varied course while pursuing his great work of
reformation ; travelling through the length and breadth
of the country, and striving zealously and faithfully in
the good cause which his conscience and sense of duty
had marked out from the time of the commencement —
of his labors in 1841, up to the period of his death,
which occurred on the 26th of August, 1858, at Pequea,
Pa. In haunts of vice and infamy, in the gloomy

prison cell, in the lowly hovel, and in the proud mansions of the rich and great, there was his influence felt;
and there did his warning voice against rum and its
abominations ring out, bringing hope and gladness to
the wretched convict in his barred cell, shut out from
the glorious sunlight and doomed to solitude and
silence, in expiation for the past. Many a bruised and
bleeding heart, and many a scattered household healed
and cemented together, have cause to bless his name,
and owe their happiness to his persevering and untiring
labors in the Washingtonian cause. But Time, with
his resistless march, has steadily moved on, and John
H. W. Hawkins, to-day, in his disembodied state, stands
in the presence of his God.
6

62

A VOICE

FROM

THE

I can pay no greater tribute to his memory than can
be found in the eloquent eulogy delivered by Joseph
Story, Esq., in the Tremont Temple, on the 7th of
November, 1858 ; and in order to set before our readers a just and true picture of the character and services
of that great and good man, we have made many valuable extracts from that address as published in the
Life of John H. W. Hawkins, as it was delivered by
Mr. Story. The following account of that meeting,
as published in that work, taken from the Temperance
Visitor, edited by S. B. Weston, we give verbatim : —
“On Sunday evening last, the meeting commemorative of the services of the late John H. W. Hawkins was held in Tremont Temple.
Providence seemed to have kindly regarded the event, as in the
early part of the day the storm, which had prevailed during the
week, ceased, and the sun beamed

forth from the sky above most

gloriously. The muddy streets of our city were by this means rendered passable,
— very comfortably so. At a very early hour large
crowds might have been seen wending their way to the Temple.
Long before the time for the services to commence, that spacious
edifice was completely filled.
“ Having been honored by the chairman of the committee of
arrangements, William R. Stacy, Esq., with a complimentary card
of invitation, we were introduced, with others, upon the speaker’s
platform. As we sat there, looking over the large audience, we
were struck with the magic loveliness of the picture presented,
— the
mass of living humanity closely packed in the slips below, and rising
in amphitheatre form in galleries on either side of the house, — and
we could not help thinking that the people are not forgetful or,
unthankful towards those who have spent their life and strength for
the promotion of a great and humane cause; and then we thought
that we should like to know the number in that large audience who

have been directly benefited by the work of Mr. Hawkins.

Could

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

63

some that we saw there have spoken out the feelings of their hearts,
how would they have given utteranée to the warmest expression of
love and admiration for the memory of Mr. Hawkins!
Could many
a heart, throbbing in many a female breast present, have given expression to its emotions, how earnest would have been the thanksgiving ascending to heaven for sending such a deliverer from
wretchedness and woe as Mr. Hawkins! And then there were the
early laborers and coadjutors in the Washingtonian reform,
— men
who have not only reformed by Mr. Hawkins’s labors, but have
cooperated with him,— who have stayed up his hands, and cheered

his heart, as he has been toiling on in the great work of his life.
There were Deacon Grant, Stephen Fairbanks, Esq., Moses Mellen,
FEsq., Henry Plympton, Esq., Daniel Kimball, Esq., Peter Thacher,

Esq., Humphrey Chadbourne, Esq., Jacob

Sleeper, Esq., and Jona-

than Preston, Esq. Then there were the presidents of the several
Washingtonian societies in this city and vicinity, —William R. Stacy,
of the Parent Washingtonian Society ; Samuel C. Knights, Esq.,
President of the Cambridgeport Temperance Reform Association;
T. M. Brown, Esq., President of the Charlestown Temperance Society; B. W. Goodhue, of the Roxbury Alliance, and several of the
and directors of these several societies.
Rev. Phineas

members

Stowe, of the Bethel Society; Rev. Mr. Dennison, of the Neptune
Temperance Society; S. A. B. Bragg, Esq., the present G. W. P.
of the Sons of Temperance; Albert Day, Esq., Superintendent of
the Washingtonian Home; Wm. Adams, Jr., Agent for the Home,
and other firm and true friends of temperance, were there.
“The exercises commenced by an anthem from the choir. The
musical direction of the evening was intrusted to Mr. E. H. Frost,
and was admirably executed.
The Tremont Musical Association
performed its part in the arrangements in most admirable style, and
the greatest credit is due to them. The anthem, and the original
hymn prepared for the occasion, were all sung in a most effective
manner.

Rev.

Converse

L. McCurdy, of this city, read

selections

from Scripture, and offered prayer. These were characterized by
great appropriateness and solemnity. The following original hymn,
written by Hodges Reed, Esq., of Taunton, was then sung:

64

A VOICE

FROM

THE

‘There are crowns in the hall of the palace on high,
Laid up till the end of the days,

For those who turn many to righteousness
From their dark and dangerous ways.
‘There’s a crystal stream in the better land,
Which flows from the great white throne,
Where the darkest stains are washed away
When the labors of earth are done.

‘Our brother is gone for his crown on high,
All starred with the rescued ones ;

He helped them to dash the tempter’s cup,
And now they are crowned as Sons.
‘ He is gone up to drink of the water of life,
And to bathe in the crystal flood :
He rested, while here, by Cherith’s brook ;

But there, by the river of God.
‘O, come mourn his loss, ye tempted ones,
And catch the mantle he wore ;-

For he’s gone to his rest, and his trumpet call
On the earth shall be heard no more.’

“The Address of Joseph Story, Esq., followed. What shall we
say of it? If classic beauty of diction, richness of illustration, and
attractiveness of delivery, can’ make a good address, then was that
of Mr. Story a decided success. It was attentively listened to
throughout, and was evidently appreciated by those who heard it.
The speaker did not seek to present any thing like a biographical
sketch

of Mr. Hawkins,

or a statistical view of the results of the

labors of the distinguished reformer, but to draw from his life the

great lessons which it is calculated to enforce.

He sought to catch

ela. Bi

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

65

and enforce the inspiration emanating from the great reformer, and
to make it warm and animate the hearts of his listeners.
“ After the Address the following original ode, written by the Rey.

~ Charles W. Dennison, was sung :—
‘Mourn we now the gallant dead,
Weep we here the honored brave;
Freely, then, our tears we shed;

Hawkins fills a glorious grave.
‘His the grave a hero fills,
Bravely fallen in the fray ;
On the everlasting hills
Stands his victor soul to-day.
‘ Streaming from his starry brow,
Light pours on our battle field ;
Hark! he calleth to us now: —
“‘ Brothers, fight, but never yield.”

‘ By the conflicts Hawkins wrought,
By the victories he won,
Bravely shall our field be fought,
Till the fight of life is done.’

“The benediction was then pronounced, and the company separated.”

We regret that the limits of this work forbid our
giving more than the following extracts from the admirable address of Mr. Story:
** Amid the various and engrossing cares of business, there has
been but little time to make a careful preparation for this occasion;
and perhaps it may be as well that our words should not be too
6 *

65

A VOICE

FROM

THE

studied or formal, but in a more social way speak forth the promptings of the heart.

Let the thoughts of this hour, then, be our heart-

thoughts.
“But why, indeed, should I speak?
which

meets

our

sight, this which

;
What need of words?
each

finds

‘This

kindling within, is

more eloquent far than any flattering words of mine. Surely, the
whole scene within our beautiful temple
— this great multitude of
warmly beating hearts — is in itself a generous and fitting tribute to
the memory of our absent brother. Brother!—vyes; for the same
Being is Father over us all. Absent !— for the voyage of life is past,
the bark has reached its last port, and the voyager stands on the
immortal shore whence there is no return.
“It is no purpose of mine to deal in unseemly adulation; for we
come not hither to pay homage to royal birth or ephemeral fame, but
rather to testify our appreciation of noble purposes, faithful labors,
and kindly deeds. And for those purposes, those labors, and those
deeds, thousands of hearts made happy have embalmed in grateful
memories the name of John Hawkins. Let us in spirit tarry for
a while in that distant valley, amid the sturdy oaks whose summer
shade he so lately enjoyed, and by the side of that spot where
loving hands

have laid him, around which, even

at this hour, the

autumn winds are twining chaplets of withered leaves — sad memorials of frail and falling human life. With these sweet sounds pass-

ing by us like the music of vesper bells on the evening air, let us
contemplate the character of our brother and the genius of his labors;
and while paying a fitting tribute to him, have our hearts stimulated
to every noble purpose and holy work. Possessed of great energy
of character, warm and tender sympathies, and a natural turn of elo-

quence, soul-stirring and earnest, he is called to a high and noble
mission, enters with a whole heart into the work, and in cooperating

with his fellow-laborers, inaugurates the great temperance reformation of this generation. In cities and towns all through the Union,

the people are astonished, and throngs gather to the halls whence
this unpretending man tells of the gloom of the past and the joy of
the present. There was a mighty influence moving through the land,

ll
bn

WASHINGTONIAN

HOMER.

67

It was not like the spectral blazing chariot of fire, with its sweeping
train rushing across the track of worlds, coming we know not whence,
and flying we know not where, startling all with wonder, but bringing good to none; but it was rather like the falling dews of evening,
and the gentle light of morning, covering earth with beauty and
gladness, carrying blessings wherever it went. * * *
“JT shall never forget when this new pioneer in the noble work
told us, in our own Faneuil Hall, years ago, the story of the drunkard’s life, in words

and looks

that beamed with earnest truth, the

tears from many a manly eye bearing witness to the power with
which he spoke.
“Jn the great Washingtonian reform which spread so rapidly
through the land, thousands of poor degraded men were saved and
the fact demonstrated that though cast down and nearly ruined, and
though every light and hope were almost extinguished, yet beneath
the black embers, and underlying the ashes of former virtue and
promise, there was still left the vital spark, which could be rekindled
into a bright flame. Shunned and neglected by others on the one
hand, losing confidence and respect for himself on the other, every
avenue for his escape appeared closed. In this new movement it was
as when the breath passed over the slain in the valley, and the dry
bones lived and stood up on their feet, an exceeding great army. So
there came forth under the new inspiration a mighty host, armed and
panoplied for the conflicts of life, with all the nobleness of their manhood again.
“To this work of love Mr. Hawkins lent his whole soul, and stood

forth the leading champion of the service. It was this new principle,
by deeds of love and words of tender sympathy to inspire confidence
and hope in the fallen, and to cheer them on in manly trial —it was
this principle that was the secret spring to that amazing success which
crowned his efforts. The power of intemperance was understood and
preached as never done before; and the inner life of the inebriate
was unfolded in a new light. He was still a man, the immortal
spark not quite quenched,—a wreck fast crumbling to decay, but
not quite destroyed. There are throbbings there of a noble heart;
crushed and lacerated though he may be, he is still a man.

68

A VOICE

FROM

THE

‘The huge rough stones without the mines,
Unsightly and unfair,
Have veins of purest marble hid
Beneath the roughness there.

‘Few rocks so bare but to the height
Some tiny moss-plant clings ;
And round the crags most desolate
The sea-bird soars and sings.
‘ Believe me, then, that rugged souls
Beneath their roughness hide
Much that is soft and beautiful;

They have their angel’s side.’

“He is an actor on the stage of life behind a mask; playing another part— some character not his own. That trembling, staggering body, in pains of ‘palsy, plague, and fever, and madness, all
combined,’ — that is not the man; that is the living imbodiment of
the curse of intemperance, stalking in human form; but hidden
within is the man, bound in prison. Search for him with an eye of
pity; call to him with a voice of love, and perchance you may give
him strength to break the bonds and shake off the prison fetters.
‘‘ By his faithful labors thousands have seen that look, have heard
the cheering word the bright one spoke: ‘ Strive and hope for better
days.’ Ofttimes along his dreary journey this man of many sorrows
has sighed for the former days of happiness, long passed away but
not forgotten; in the hidden chambers of his soul wished he might
become the child of innocence,—
the joyous boy once more. Ah,
those memories floating like distant music to his ear, but past,
— all
past and gone!
“Yn a touching tradition connected with the chime of bells on the
Limerick Cathedral, it is said that they were made for a convent in
Italy, by an enthusiastic

native, with great labor and

skill.

The

Italian having afterwards acquired a competency, fixed his house near
the convent cliff, and for many years enjoyed the daily chime of his
beloved bells. But in some political convulsion which followed the

yon

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

G9

monks were driven from the monastery, the Italian exiled from his

home, and the bells were carried away to Ireland. After a long interval, the course of his wanderings brought him to Limerick. On
a calm and beautiful summer’s evening as the vessel which bore him
floated along the broad stream of the Shannon, he suddenly heard
the bells — his well remembered bells— peal forth from the cathedral
tower. They were the long-lost treasures of his memory; home,
happiness, friends, all early recollections were in their sound. Crossing his arms on his breast, he lay back in the boat. When the
rowers looked round they saw his face still turned towards the cathedral, but his eyes were closed on the world.
“ Many of these wanderers and exiles floating on the stream of
Time have often had awakened early recollections of home, happiness,
and friends. Yes; often have they suddenly heard the bells pealing
forth from the cathedral towers of memory, and have seen ‘the light
of other days’ flash through the gloom, and then sank down to melancholy despair.
“ Heaven blessed Mr. Hawkins in his unceasing and laborious toil
to redeem such as these; for its accomplishment, all these eighteen
years, in sacrificing and journeyings, in heat and cold, by day and
night, in storm and fair, his heart has never grown cold, his hands
weary, or his lips silent. Upon this altar was laid his all— time,
_ means, and strength. My words would do injustice to the promptings of my heart, did I not pay him his just meed of praise.
“We can but bless God that such an apostle was raised up at such
a time, to carry forward so glorious a work. Bless God, that he
himself was lifted up, as one has lately said, —
‘To rouse the sad inebriate, left to grope
In midnight darkness unrelieved by hope,

:

And bid him, with one last strong effort, burst

The bonds that bind him to the fiend accursed;

?

For who, that hears how Hawkins was made free,
Can henceforth say, There is no hope for me?’

Ay, bless God for this example, at once so noble, so generous, of
one who loved his fellow-men.
Wherein he did well, let us imitate

70

A VOICE

FROM

THE

his example, remembering that we live in a weak and erring world,
— that no man liveth to himself alone. The subtle thread of sympathy runs through every heart, binding the whole family in one.
Who shall wrest it from its secret hiding-place? Who shall rob
its pulses of their fullest circuit. Corroding riches cannot fill its
place. Wealth or power cannot buy it, for it is heaven-born. God
plants it in the inner chamber of the heart. True love —true charity —it is not in the pile of gold you tender, it may be in a simple
word or look. The feeblest deed, the offering of a kindly heart, is
more of love divine and charity than all the bags of mouldering gold
in yonder vaults, when wrung from sordid hands. ‘ Whosoever shall
give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only,
verily, I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.’ * * *
‘Tt is noble to crown our hearts with kindly deeds. It is exalting
to sow blessings around our pathway. ‘There is that scattereth,
and yet increaseth ; and there is that withholdest more than is meet,
but it tendeth to poverty.’ Shall we not know the happy experience
that it is ‘blessed to give,’ and to do? Would we drive far hence a
multitude of ills? Would we open unknown avenues of joy, and
lighten many a weary care or burden? Let us give our hearts, our
hands, our lips, to some

good work of love, and live for others, not

for ourselves alone.
‘ W ouldst thou from sorrow find a sweet relief?
Or is thy heart oppressed with woes untold ?
Balm wouldst thou gather for corroding grief ?
Pour blessings round thee like a shower of gold.’

“JT have not deemed it needful to enter into a detailed narrative of
nis various labors from place to place, or to recount all the results
wrought out for the happiness and prosperity of multitudes who have
been redeemed through his untiring efforts, or to speak of the great
progress made in the general cause to which he was strongly attached ; that labor is already in other hands. But I content myself
within the time allotted me to dwell on the spirit and principle of
the service to which his strength was first given —of the remarkable

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

71

reformation with which his name is inseparably identified ; which has
_ been and shall still be the bright star of hope to many crushed and
broken hearts. My heart and thoughts have clustered around the
great practical truth which they have developed, — that a large number of those who seem to be almost degraded by intoxication may
be reclaimed and restored to society. Yet, in view of the strength
and control of this unnatural appetite over its victims and slaves, I
am convinced that every one who would reform —and it is often a fearful conflict
— must bring into exercise the most vital energy of his own
self-will, and needs to seek refuge under the hallowed influences of
moral and religious principle, and, above all, to lay hold on the help
of God, ere he can safely say, ‘I am forever redeemed.’ ‘ Let him
that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall.’

_ “Thus have my words been chosen, that the lessons we draw from
our contemplation on this occasion, may prompt us to those noble
aspirations and holy deeds, which can make us each in our sphere a
blessing to our generation. It was appropriate at the very close of
his life, that among his last acts of love should be a visit to a family
where, but a year before, he had bestowed his blessing. It was a
bright ray of light, gilding the sky of his declining day.
“ Death came suddenly upon him, and on the 26th of August, at
the house of his son, in the midst of delightful associations, surrounded by the wife and kindred he loved, he bade the final ‘ farewell,’ and like a shock of corn fully ripe for the harvest, this faithful
laborer, this Christian soldier, was gathered to his rest. He has
* gone from among us, and who buildeth his monument?
The
obelisks and pyramids of Egypt are among the grandest works of
art to commemorate the deeds of her kings; but their names were
stained with blood and cruelty. Wealth and power can rear sculptured marble and costly statues to whomsoever they will, but our
most expressive monuments are those reared by ourselves — the purchase of our own lives, the work of our own hands.

ful monument

The most faith-

to the painter, is the almost breathing form with

which he himself has clothed the canvas;

to the sculptor, the beau-

tiful being his own skilful fingers enticed from the shapeless block

e

7

42

A VOICE

FROM

ae

Fi =a

Se

*

THE

of marble; to the poet, his own lines, the gems of poetry which
make his name and fame immortal. The noblest monument to
Washington is that by which he wins from a whole nation the ehdearing title, ‘The Father of his Country.’ Although some chiselled
stone marks a sacred spot in our own beautiful Auburn, yet the true
memorials which bear a perpetual fragrance to the name of Amos
Lawrence are found in the city of the living, amid the busy streets,
in all the homes he blessed, in all the hearts he gladdened. Whoever has passed down from St. Paul’s Cathedral into the vault below,
and stood by the dust of those whose names form a bright galaxy
on the pages of English history, will well remember the unpretending slab that marks the resting-place of one who will never be forgotten as long as those foundation stones endure. In the adjoining
wall is a marble slab with this inscription: ‘ Beneath lies Sir Christopher Wren, the builder of this cathedral and city, who lived for
more than ninety years, not to himself but the public good,’ and
closing with these words: ‘ Lector, si monumentum
requiris,
circumspice.’ (Reader, seekest thou his monument? Look around.)
This vast cathedral, with all its magnificent appointments, these lofty
church towers, these public works, are. all the monuments of his
mighty mind and genius.
Here and there are the most truthful monuments to him of whom
we speak. These happy homes, these reunited companions, these
joyful parents

and

children, these

blessings,

these kindly deeds,

scattered in cities and towns, over many a mountain and down
through many a vale, along many rivers’ banks, and in many a forest
shade. These are the memorials which bear witness to the character
of John Hawkins, and the genius of his labors. There kind friends,
in that distant valley, amid the sturdy oaks whose summer shade he so
lately enjoyed, and by the side of that spot where loving hands have
laid him, around which, even at this hour, the autumn winds have

been twining their chaplets of withered leaves, let there be placed
the appropriate inscription,
‘Lector, si monumentum requiris, cireumspice.”

*

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

prey

(o

From the parent tree—the Washington society—
sprang up the various societies and orders that are in
existence, having for their platform temperance principles and the dissemination and advancement of temperance views. The Sons of Temperance, whose influence has extended far and wide, cementing and
banding together in the bonds of brotherhood all the
true soldiers of the cause, and, by their association
and watchful interest, supporting and sustaining many
who but for their aid might yield to the insidious wiles
of the destroyer, have their origin and birth in that
organization.
The Temple of Honor, an association
of the same nature, but of a higher grade, also sprang
into life from the same cause. Although of more recent
date than the order of the Sons of Temperance, yet
this ‘society is at present established upon a safe
and permanent foundation, and numbers in its ranks
thousands upon thousands of the best and most influential citizens of the United States, — its objects, as well
as that of the Sons of Temperance, being of a beneficial
as well as of a social character,— granting pecuniary
aid to indigent and suffering brothers and their families,
holding stated periodical meetings where temperance
views and principles are socially discussed in connection
with the graver business of the order. Various other
societies have also emanated from the same cause, haying for their object the same ultimate ends. The order
of Good Templars, the Cadets of Temperance, and,
last, though not least, the Bands of Hope, composed of
children, like all the others aiming at the salvation of
—

‘

74

A VOICE

FROM

THE

the human family, and carrying on a fierce warfare with
the great common enemy of man.
Bands of hope they
are indeed, instilling in the youthful mind the pure
and holy sentiments of temperance and fraternal love,
and training the tender plant so that it will grow up in
strength and beauty, to be an ornament to society, and
a support to the decaying parent tree. Perhaps no
means that can be exerted operate more powerfully
to instil in the minds of the rising generation the
horrors and evils of intemperance, as well as stimulate
a love and appreciation of the elements of their beautiful motto,
— “ Love, Purity, and Fidelity.”
We have thus far given but a brief version of the
rise, progress, and some of the results of the Washington temperance cause, from its birth in the city of ©
Baltimore, with a sketch of the services of Mr. Hawkins, the pioneer missionary of that organization. We
have been compelled to be brief in our remarks, as a
more extended history of the past would carry us beyond the limits of our contemplated work. Yet from
that source emanated a world of good, and roused to
action the slumbering energies of many who have since
worked nobly in the cause. We could cite numerous
instances where good has sprung from evil, and men,
who were thought beyond the pale of hope and redemption, have shone forth like bright beacon stars
to shower light and hope upon the darkened path
of their fellow-men.
One particular instance of this
kind, which we have been solicited to record, is of
Mr. Samuel C. Knights, who for years followed in the

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

7

cr

path of the arch-fiend of destruction that leadeth down
to hell, and who for a number of years followed the
business and avocation of a rumseller.
This man, in
the winter of 1857, signed the total abstinence pledge
in a public bar room, and has from that time religiously
kept it. He is now the president of the Cambridge
Reform Association, which he was mainly instrumental
in bringing into life, and which has done noble duty
in the cause of reform.
We have thus far, we believe, given a correct, though
brief, history of the origin of the rise and progress of
the temperance movement in America.
In our next
chapter we shall proceed to discuss the further means
which we consider necessary to adopt in order to reform, surely and permanently, those who, by long continued habit, have fastened upon themselves the fatal
fascinations of the inebriating bowl.

“ICo

A VOICE

FROM

THE

CHAPTER

Ys

‘White as a white sail on a dusky sea
When half the horizon’s clouded and half free,
Fluttering between the dun wave and the sky,
Is Hope’s last gleam in man’s extremity.”
Byron.

Emanatinc from the Parent Washington Society,
which we have touched upon in our last chapter, the
advocates of temperance in the city of Boston, early
in the year 1841, organized an association for the promoting of the cause of temperance and the dissemination of total abstinence principles, under the name of
the “ Parent Washington Total Abstinence Society.”
The main object of this organization was the same as
that of the body from which it sprang; yet it sought
to extend its philanthropy still farther. It sought, for
one of its objects, to furnish immediate assistance to
individuals who were reduced to the brink of despair
and tortured with want, through the crushing influence
of the damning bowl.
For the space of two years after its organization the
meetings of the society were held in Marlboro’ Chapel,
while the lodging rooms connected therewith were
located in Graphic Court, opposite Franklin Street.
From there they removed to No. 75 Court Street, to a

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

17

large and commodious hall, which had formerly been
occupied as a museum.
They also fitted up rooms
under their hall for the temporary accommodation of
reformed, or rather reforming, men.
They soon again
removed to rooms which they procured and fitted up
in Bromfield Street, in common with the hall, for the
purpose before mentioned.
During the first two years of its existence the officers
and members of the society held weekly meetings in
six different localities in the city of Boston, namely:
in North Bennett Street, Milton Street, Washington
Place, East Street, Common Street, and Hull Street.
It has continued its central meetings up to the present time. Over seventy thousand persons have signed
the total abstinence pledge and had their names enrolled upon the archives of this society, since it first
commenced its labors in the good and righteous cause
of redeeming men from destruction.
The society had a standing committee appointed,
whose duty it was to furnish speakers, when requested,
to all neighboring and auxiliary societies throughout
the State; and the calls upon them for speakers continued to flow in so fast that they were compelled to
be in session almost every evening, to meet the steadily
increasing demands made upon them. The speakers
they selected to perform their missionary services were
mostly chosen from the ranks of those men who had
been reclaimed from drunkenness through the means
of this society.
We do not propose to publish detailed extracts of
7 *

78

A VOICE

FROM

THE

the various operations of that body from the very
voluminous records now in the possession of William
R. Stacy, Esq, of No. 11 Cornhill, Boston, where they
may be inspected by applying to that gentleman, who
was for a long time president of that body; but, in
order to show fully the objects and intended operations of the organization, we publish the Address of
Samuel F. Holbrook, Esq., its president, which we find
in their first quarterly report, made in the month of
July, 1841 : —
“The Washington Total Abstinence Society was organized on the
25th of April, 1841. On the evening of its formation the officers
elected were a president, two vice-presidents, a corresponding and
recording secretary, and treasurer; after which there were chosen
twenty-four gentlemen to serve as ward committee, whose duty it
was to pick up inebriates, induce them to sign the pledge of total
abstinence, and forsake all places where intoxicating drink was to
be had, and also to visit the families of the reformed and administer

to their wants.
“Tt now became necessary to have a place exclusively our own,
where we could bring the unfortunate victim of intemperance, nurse
him, and converse with him, and obtain his signature to the pledge ;
and none among us being able to be responsible for such a place, we
accepted the generous and noble offer of Deacon Grant, which was,
to obtain just such a place as we desired, and that he would become
responsible for the rent; and being fully convinced that the hand
of God was with us, — the pillar of cloud to the wandering Israelite,
an unerring guide,—we followed its direction, and were led to
Marlboro’ Chapel. We obtained Hall No. 1 for a business and occasional lecture room, and the chapel for a public meeting once a
week. Hall No. 1 was furnished with newspapers from yarious
towns,

as well as nearly all the publications of our own

city.

A

table prepared, and the seats were arranged » the form of a reading

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

79

room; a fountain of cold water and a desk containing the pledge
occupied another part of the room.
*‘Our pledge, for the first week, had two hundred and eighteen
names;

and then, as if by magic, the work commenced.

And

I

think it is doubtful if in the annals of history there is any record of
a work of such a nature and progressing with so much silence, and
yet so sure in its advance. Surely it is the work of the omnipotent
God; and when he says ‘ Let there be light,’ the mandate is obeyed,
— darkness is driven away, and glorious light appears.
“ As it has been suggested before that the Almighty hand was our
guide, let us for a moment contemplate it. Our office was just such
a one as the case requires. The gentlemen acting as ward committees were filled with unexampled zeal and perseverance in the
performance of their duties; leaving their own business in order to
hunt up the drunkard; and often as they have found him, scarcely
ever have failed to reclaim him and restore him to his family again,
asober man.
So attentive were they to this voluntary duty, that in
a fortnight we had four hundred names on our pledge; families in
all directions were assisted, children sent to school decently clad,
employment obtained for the husband; the countenance of the wife
assumed a cheerful and pleasing aspect; landlords grew easy, and
in fact every thing relating to the circumstances of the reformed
inebriate had undergone a complete change for the better. And as
though Heaven had decreed on our side, the whole community was
with us in codperation ; and even those from whom we have every
reason to expect some opposition, were and are now the silent and
astonished beholders of that which almost led them to distrust their
own senses, — to see a man who for twenty years, or perhaps more,
has been in the habit of spending from twenty-five to thirty cents
per day for drink, become

suddenly sober, a total abstinence man;

and not only an astonishment to the vender of rum, but to his own
family. Now the husband and father enters his dwelling with an
armful of chips, a basket of provisions, and some little present for
the children, and all are happy to see him. His domicile is a place
of comfort and rest; when, before his reform, his very appearance

80

A VOICE

FROM

THE

caused all to flee before him, his noise and brawling disturbed the
neighborhood, and probably sent him to the house of correction.
«Another very astonishing feature in this reform, which goes to
strengthen the truth of Divine direction, is this: temperance societies had been formed a number of years throughout the land; the
baneful and deleterious effects of alcohol have been ably set forth by
the medical man and chemist; the strongest appeals have been
made to the drunkard, which only cause him to laugh at the idea,

and when the pledge was named it was sneered at as a direct surrender of liberty, the brightest jewel an American possesses.
— ‘O
no; if I can’t control myself, I think it’s a pity. I shall drink when
I please, and as much, and what I please. No man shall control me.’
But now, how changed the scene! The reeling drunkard is met in
the street, or drawn out from some old filthy shed, taken by the arm,
spoken kindly to, invited to the hall, and with reluctance dragged
there, or carried in a carriage if not too filthy; and there he sees
himself surrounded by friends, and not what he most feared— police
officers ;every one takes him by the hand; he begs to come to, and
when sober signs the pledge, and goes away a reformed man. And
it does not end here. The man takes a pledge, and from his bottle
companions obtains a number of signers, who likewise become sober
men. Positively, these are facts. Now, can any human agency alone
do this? All will answer, No; for we have invariably the testimony
of vast numbers of reformed men, who have spoken in public and
declared they have broken off a number of times, but have as often
relapsed again: and the reason they give for doing this is, that they
rely wholly on the strength of their resolution without looking any
higher; but now they feel the need of God’s assistance, which having
obtained, their reform is genuine.

The question is often asked, and

with a great deal of propriety too, Do they all hold out who sign
the pledge ? We answer, No.

Some —and, be assured, the number

is very small— go back to drinking again; but as soon as it is known
to any of the society that this is the case, the backslider is waited
upon by some friend, who seldom fails to induce him to sign the
pledge again and commence anew, and then the fact of his having

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

Si

violated the pledge fills him with shame and repentance, and is the
means of his adhering more rigidly to it. Sometimes reports are
circulated by enemies that such and such men have been seen drinking. ‘These reports are immediately inquired into, so that the reputation of the man may not suffer ; and if found to be false, and originating from his having been seen in a place where alcohol was sold,
these false stories often operate as cautions to shun even the appearance of evil; and among the hardest cases of reform from drunkenness which have come within our sphere, we have found that the very
man who a few weeks ago would go reeling through the streets in a
state of beastly intoxication— filthy, miserable, wholly regardless of
character, or any thing else that pertained to a man, and would finally
crawl into some filthy hole for the night, or perhaps lie in the gutter
—this man, when reformed, is as tenacious of his character as though
he had never been degraded. He feels that now he is a man; he
sees from whence he was taken, and rejoices in the victory. And it
it seems as though a general renovation had taken place. His first
business is to get clear of his filthy rags; and if he has a family, his
first desire is to make them comfortable, which he very soon can
accomplish by applying to our committee of relief, who immediately
look into their wants and render them all the aid in their power.
’Tis true our means are small, and therefore we must deal out sparingly and with discretion. We have furnished a large amount of
clothing to those who have been entirely destitute of every thing but
what they stood in, and that so filthy that it was necessary, before
they could put on any thing clean, to go and strip themselves and
thoroughly wash their bodies; and the next thing to look to was
the family —if a group of half-starved beings could be called a family.
Here was misery in the extreme, which can only be known by those
who have witnessed the drunkard’s home and its attendant wretchedness. A disposition to obtain employment immediately follows a
reform ; the old faculty and genius that has so long lain steeped in
rum now begins to dawn again; give him tools and stock, and away
he goes rejoicing. Now ona Sabbath day he is seen walking to some
place of worship with his wife; and she, with joy and gladness in

82

A VOICE

FROM

THE

her heart, ceases not to return thanks to God for the unexpected
reformation.

“If we were to go into detail we should swell this address into
tediousness. Perhaps a few statements of the manner in which some
have been reclaimed would be interesting. It cannot be doubted for
a moment, that every temperance society in this city and every other
city, has labored with all their might, have been liberal when money
was required, and in fact left nothing undone, as they thought, that
could be done, to put down intemperance. Appeals and remonstrances have been made to the city government; the ballot box has
also been used as an instrument of destruction against the ‘cursed
stuff.’ What shall we do? what step can we take next? was the
anxious inquiry among our temperance friends. As for reclaiming the
drunkard, that was entirely out of the question; they must and will
die shortly, and now our business is to take care of the rising gen-

eration. And when the hard working woman complained of her
drunken husband, the reply was, and from all feeling of good too,
O, send him to the house of correction, or poor house, immediately,

and then we will do what we can for you and your children. Now the
great difficulty was that our temperance friends were, generally, men
in higher circles of life, who would revolt at the idea of taking a drunkard by the arm in the street and walk with him to some place where
he could be made sober and receive friendly advice. If the drunken
man was noticed at all, he was taken aside from under the horses’ feet,

and perhaps put into some house and there left. Not that I would
be understood as speaking in the remotest manner against the be‘nevolence and philanthropy which characterized our city, both as it
respects the drunkard and the destitute, for no city in the Union has
done more towards alleviating distress than has Boston. But the
method of reclaiming the apparently lost inebriate, such as the Washington Total Abstinence Society has adopted, never entered their
heads; it was not thought of until our society was formed. Then
some twenty or thirty drunkards came forward and signed the total
abstinence pledge and related their experience, and this induced
others to do the same;

good earnest.

and then the work

of reform commenced in

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

83

«As I observed, I will make a few statements of the manner and
success of our labors. For instance, a note is left at Marlboro’

Chapel from a wife, stating that her husband has been a drunkard for
a number of years. She requests some of our society to call at his
residence. One or two are immediately selected; they go, and at
last find the place, and O, what a place! just such a place as we
should expect to find a drunkard’s home. The picture is generally
the same in all cases. Poverty and wretchedness in the extreme are
depicted in every countenance
— the wife miserable and haggard,
the children in most cases ragged and pale. No furniture, no provision, no clothing; but all around is filth and misery. This is, you
may rely upon it, no exaggeration. I have witnessed scenes, if possible, much worse than have been described.

The visitor enters, and

commences his work by inquiring the cause of so much poverty. In
some cases the woman bursts into tears, and then tells of better days
before her husband became a drunkard. The hand of friendship is
extended to the husband; the pledge is introduced; the blessing,
the happiness and peace which will follow if the pledge of total
abstinence is signed and kept, are held out. Hope lightens up the
eye; the pledge is signed; relief is brought; employment is sought
and obtained; another tenement is provided; articles of furniture
are furnished ; clothing for the man and his whole family are immediately supplied, and every thing assumes a new aspect. Then to
hear the gratitude of the poor reformed inebriate—
how thankful
he is to the kind friend who first induced him to become a sober
man
— is truly affecting. This is only a faint sketch of some of the
scenes I have witnessed in the early part of our labor, and this is
the method adopted by the Washington Total Abstinence Society
for reclaiming the apparently lost drunkard who has a family. The
young drunkard must be treated with perfect kindness, and a strong
appeal made to his feelings with regard to his throwing himself away
while full of youthful vigor; and he too, when convinced that he
can retrieve his lost character, comes up to the pledge and becomes
again respectable.
“T fear, if I should relate a thousandth part of the detailed misery

84

A VOICE

FROM

THE

and its happy alleviation that has come within my knowledge, it
probably would convey no more intrinsic truth than already appears ;
and besides, being employed from morning until evening about my
business,
— which every one knows is fatiguing,
—it will not be
expected that I should do any more than give a few outlines of the
doings of the society.

“The community should be made acquainted with the fact that
the reformation of one drunkard is of more value to them than they
probably appreciate at present. In the first place, a public nuisance
is abated ; for surely such is a drunkard. Next, a family is provided
for, by him on whom the duty should devolve. An acquisition is
made to society. You have the skill and the product of the industry
of the reformed man; and instead of haying him to support, he
assists to support those who are really objects of charity; he is
zealously engaged in reforming his fellow-inebriates ; he becomes a
useful member of society in whatever sphere he may move,
— pays
his taxes, casts his vote, and is eligible to office. Now this work of
reform, and

the necessary

labor

attending it, must be attended

to

by some who can spare their time, and will pursue it with untiring
energy. Such is not the case with the present board of officers of
the Washington Total Abstinence Society. They are all men who
have a business to pursue ; and in doing the arduous duties of this
unprecedented reform, their business must suffer or the work must
be neglected ; and in justice to the gentlemen who have voluntarily
accepted offices, they have always considered the duties of this
society to be paramount to every other duty. For myself, as president, I must say that the necessary and perhaps unavoidable interruptions in my business, by unceasing calls, are such as at times to
put my patience to its utmost tension ; but when I reflect a moment
on the nature of the position in which I stand, all is calm again.
“ A great deal might be said that would illustrate the facts above,
with reference to the nature and effects of alcohol, its operation on
the worst passions, etc.; but this has already been done in the
numerous temperance addresses that have been delivered in this and
other cities.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

85

“Tn answer to the question which has before been asked, ‘ Do
all who sign the pledge hold out ?’ I would again say, No; and can
any one who is at all acquainted with human nature expect such a
thing? Do we not know of cases of expulsion from our churches,
and of men removed from high and responsible offices ? Certainly
we do; and all this is because they have not proved true to their
pledge. Admitting this fact, then let us ask what proportion of
those named proved refractory ? We answer, a very small proportion. Then let us take the four thousand reformed men who
have signed our total abstinence pledge, and see how many have
gone back. Suppose one hundred have broken their pledge, and
have become drunkards again; is there not three thousand nine
hundred left
?— and Ido not believe any thing like one hundred
can be found who have tasted any thing intoxicating. And there
are those among us who have been drunk since they signed the
pledge, but are now, I trust, immovably fixed total abstinence men.
They appealed to Heaven for help, and it has been granted. It
is an axiom laid down by all who have any knowledge of human
nature, that man does not possess resolution strong enough to resist
the habit without Divine assistance;

and this assistance cannot be

obtained without being asked for.
“ There is now presented to the public the Auditor’s Report; and
I presume the great object and meaning is fully understood, which
is to reclaim the unfortunate drunkard;

and as I have before stated,

this great and important work must be perseveringly attended to,
and by those best acquainted with the nature of carrying it on, —
must come from the benevolent and the philanthropist. Only furnish us with the means, and we will do the labor. The citizens of
Boston are too zealous in every good cause, ever to let the cause of
reform from drunkenness fail for want of funds.”

Some of the direct results of the exertions of the
society appear in the quarterly report we have before
spoken of ; showing a palpable decrease of crime, and
consequently a decrease in the expenses of the city
8

86

A VOICE

FROM

THE

government.
The diminution in the number of commitments for drunkenness in comparison with the same
months in the preceding year, appear in the following report, showing conclusively the. benefits accomplished by the association during its yet brief life.
AUDITOR’S

REPORT.

In presenting to the public this report, I would, in the name of
the Washington Total Abstinence Society, return their sincere thanks
to those who have contributed to the fund for the relief of reformed
drunkards. From our unnamed friend who sent us two hundred
dollars, to the unknown child who enclosed to us twenty-five cents,
to every contributor, whether in a church contribution or individual
gift, to one and all we offer our sincere thanks.
The society has labored, in its uses of the money given, to make
such an application of it as would most certainly meet the views
of the givers. Our quarter day has arrived, and according to the
promise of the government of this society, at its formation, that
every dollar bestowed

on us should be accounted for, I trust that I,

as their chosen organ, shall make such a report as will satisfy them
with the past and secure their aid for the future.
The treasurer’s account has undergone a strict examination, and
was found correct, and stands thus : —

Received into the treasury at various times and places,

.

Donations from various individuals,

.

»

Received from Dr. Channing, trustee of rent Fun,
Received from chairman of delegating committee,. .

.

. 1680.00
. 124.00

Received from miscellaneous sources,

«

«

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

«

. $603.71
sooo

04.09
—e

$2574.30

Paid out for board and lodging various members unable to
furnish themselves,.
.° . . + «= -(c « /is/snnnee meen
Paid out for clothing for the destitute,. . . ..
. . . 778.70
Paid out for relief to families, individuals, various miscel-

laneous charges, &c., 5

.

.).

6.

en

a

ils

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

87

Loans to destitute individuals, by way of relief, where there
was a prospect of its being eventually returned, . .

213.51

$2537.10
Balance now in the treasury,.

.

.

...

...

+

«

$37.20

In addition to the above, the society has received one barrel of
pork, four hams, a considerable

all of which
his family.
pended was
an asylum.

quantity of second-hand

clothing;

has been bestowed upon the unfortunate inebriate and
It will be seen that about two thirds of the sum exreceived from Dr. Channing, trustee of donations for
When the public were solicited for aid to found a tem-

porary asylum, it was contemplated to take a honse, furnish it,-hire

suitable persons to conduct it, and supply every thing needful for the
comfort of the inebriate. After much thought, various calculations
being made, it was found to be the cheapest and best course to
pursue the system of boarding out those who might be thrown
upon their hands, and thus save the expense of house rent, furniture, keeper, and help in the house, fuel, and many

other heavy

expenses. They accordingly selected three good boarding-houses,
kept by discreet members of the society, who have thus far given
entire satisfaction, charging no more than the actual time the
boarders have remained. On another account additional advantages arise from adopting this plan. Those boarded knew well
that each week took from the society a specific sum for them personally, consequently they were more inclined to support themselves than they would have been if the society had a house of
their own. They therefore adopted the plan of boarding out single
persons, and assisting the inebriate and his family who had homes;

trusting in this way to carry out fully, on the cheapest scale, the
views of the donors to the asylum. In addition to not less than
one hundred and fifty persons boarded out, two hundred and fifty
families have been more or less benefited.
Families the most
wretched have been made comfortable ; by our exertions many
families

that

were

scattered

have

been

reunited;

fathers,

sons,

88

A VOICE

FROM

THE

and brothers have been taken from the houses of correction and
industry, from the dram shops, and from the lowest places of degradation,

restored

and

brought

back

again under

the same

roof,

made happy, industrious, and temperate, once more to eat at the
same table, once more to join and offer up at the same family
altar thanksgivings and praise to Almighty God for this great
deliverance. Our «society at present numbers about 4000 members. Suppose one third to be heads of families, each family
containing five persons, you have in all 9332 persons. We have
expended

$2537, a fraction over

27 cents

each person, for three

months. This is a very low estimate of the number, as no doubt
remains; but one half are heads of families. In this case you would
have 12,000 persons ; then it would be but a fraction over 21 cents

each person. Truly they have been redeemed at a cheap rate; at
a less sum than it would have cost the 4000 signers for intoxicating drinks for one day, setting aside all the misery, loss of time,
expenses to the city, &c. Supposing 2000 out of the number have
added to the common stock 10 cents only per day in consequence
of temperance, and you have for the ninety days past $18,000; at
the same ratio, in one year, you would have 37,328 persons
— over
40 per cent. of the whole population,—at an expense of $10,148;
being a net gain to common stock of nearly $62,000 per annum.
Suppose 8000 only, out of the 12,000, have been a burden to
society; you are relieved of that, and a further sum of not less
than $4500 paid into your city treasury from taxes received from
those who have not heretofore paid any; the expenses of. your
jail, house of correction, house of industry, insane hospital, house of
reformation, police and municipal courts, city police, night watch,
and other enormous expenses, reduced at once, and to continue so;

your property and persons will be more safe, your insurance less;
the expenses of fire departments will be reduced in consequence
of fires being lessened, caused by the incendiary, or by careless, intoxicated persons; petty larceny will be hardly known among us;
on the contrary, families will be happier, children better instructed
and clad, your property trusted out be safer, your houses of wor-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

89

ship better attended; in fine, intelligence, industry, virtue, temperance, and religion will be triumphant; and all this at what cost?
None, I answer;

on the contrary, our gain is happiness and $62,000

per annum. The more I look into the subject, the more I am astonished. Who is there among us, of whatever grade or situation
in society, from the highest to the very lowest, who views it in whatever light he pleases, can say, I have no interest in the matter, but

on the contrary is constrained to say, I have, we all have, the deepest
interest in it.

The work must and shall go on;

and, when Bos-

tonians use these words “must” and “ shall” the work is sure to be
done, and that quickly. Since this society went into operation the
delegating committee have sent out two hundred and seventeen
delegations to one hundred and sixty towns in Massachusetts, New
Hampshire, Maine, Vermont, and Rhode Island, with wonderful suc-

cess, Societies have been formed in all directions, the impetus being
given here. Some of those towns where we have formed societies
are now sending out their delegates. The whole country is now
alive to the subject. Its good effects have just begun to be seen
and felt. Not aday passes but that delegates are sent for to the
society. So numerous have been the calls, that in a great number
of instances they have to be laid over to a future time. It is acknowledged on all sides that no people like ours— although unlearned —could create such a wonderful interest in the all absorbing cause. Delegates are sent out freely from this society, and in
a great many instances at a heavy loss; yet, as a whole, the committee
have more than met their expenses, and paid a surplus into the
treasury. Proceeding, as the committee has, in bringing out new
speakers, and sending them abroad, and carrying the work rapidly
forward, in one short year the whole of the Northern States will be
completely revolutionized. Forming societies, in a circuit of twenty
or thirty miles all around us, has had a powerful effect in this city;
the rum-seller here, gets now but little help except from strangers
within a circuit of twenty miles, and ere long, for want of patronage,
must seek some more useful employment. The labor of this committee is arduous, but is the mainspring in the work. As a proof

g*

:

90

A VOICE

FROM

THE

of the good effects of the work, two delegates, in one single day, in
a neighboring town, took 194 pledges ; two others, in ten days, took
1015 names, and formed three new societies ; two others, in the same
time, took 1125 names.

There is no doubt that at least 50,000 persons have signed the
pledge in the different towns that our delegates have visited. Where
societies were already formed, a more lively interest was created,—
new signers obtained from those who had been inebriates, and thus
a new energy imparted. Where societies had not before existed,
new societies were formed. Taking the same average in the country
as in the city, you have 116,664 persons; adding to the city, 9332;
making a total of 125,996 persons, at a cost of $2537—a fraction

over two cents each person,—less than the price of one glass of
grog.
I take this opportunity, in the name and behalf of this society, of
tendering to the justices and clerks of the police court my hearty
thanks for their kindness in affording, as far as consistent with duty,

every facility to our members in their attempts to rescue and bring
back to the paths of temperance the poor, forsaken, heart-broken
drunkards, who came under their cognizance. Many, very many,
have been taken from this. court and restored to their families and
friends, who do not appear in the report from the houses of correction and industry. Thus it will be seen that a heavy expense has
been saved to the city, and many a person brought back to usefulness unknown
to the public.
In a letter to me from Capt. Charles Robbins, master of the House
of Correction, he says: “In May, 1843, 32 persons were committed
for drunkenness;

in June, 1840, 46 persons; in July, 1840, 55 per-

sons; in May, 1841, 32 persons; in June, 1841, 17 persons; in July,

1841, 26 persons; making a difference in those three months of only
58 persons. This shows at once the beneficial effects of the society’s
movements.”
Capt. Chandler, superintendent of the House

of Industry, in a
letter to me of July 27, says: ‘ Eight persons have been discharged
from this house for the purpose of joining your society. About

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

OL

thirty men and women, with their children, who have taken the
Catholic temperance pledge,
— most of whom were considered confirmed drunkards, and had been so for many years, —not one of
them has returned on account of a renewal of former habits of in-

toxication.” Thus it will be seen that our Catholic brethren have
formed a most excellent society, and are heart and hand with us in
endeavoring to drive from this land of their adoption a tyrant far more
potent, and whose chains are more galling to wear, than any oppression has as yet been able to forge and bind upon their native country.
May God bless them in the noble work. Let it be our endeavor to
emulate their zeal, and rival their exertions in this sacred cause.

In

the same letter, Capt. Chandler says: “It is my opinion that the
temperance movements,
— which appear to be conducted upon correct

principles,
— with the blessing of God, have prevented many from
coming here who otherwise must have come, had there been no unusual exertions by the friends of the inebriate in their behalf.”

As a further proof of the beneficial effects produced by the movements of this society, I subjoin the following returns, politely furnished by Artemas Simonds, Esq., director of the House of Industry:
“Inmates admitted into the House of Industry during the months of
May, June, and July, for the five years past.

In 1837, 301; 1838,

237;

1011:

1839, 212;

1840, 242; whole

amount,

In 1841, 210; showing a falling off of 43 admissions

average,

253.

this year, as

compared with the average of four preceding years. The number of
inmates in the house, August Ist, for five years past, has been as follows: in 1837, 540; 1838, 557; 1839, 497; 1840, 519; whole
amount, 2113:

average 528.

In 1841, 502; showing a falling off

of 26 this year, as compared with the average of four preceding
years, notwithstanding an increase of some ten to fifteen per cent. in

the population.”
Capt. Barry, of the City Watch, in a letter, says: “In the months
of May, 1840, and May, 1841, the number of drunkards brought in
by the watch was about the same. In June, 1840, 88 drunkards
were brought in; in June, 1841, 44,— exactly one half the number.
The number in July, 1841, averages about the same,
— one half the

92,

A VOICE

FROM

THE

number of July, 1840.” He says, “The temperance movements,
among the sons of Erin, had a perceptible influence; it could be
plainly seen that there was a change for the better. But, after the
Washington Total Abstinence Society had got fairly under way,
the change was very great. I consider it, in a great measure, owing
to the very active part the Washington Total Abstinence Society
have taken in the cause of temperance.” Thus far the labors of the
society have been experimental. And has not the experiment succeeded admirably? The answer is in this report. In making an experiment on such a scale, much money has been needed and much
expended. Almost all which has been subscribed, as herein stated, has
been used. The treasury is empty, and a great work remains to be
done. The society is most anxious to continue its labors ; and that it
may do so, it now makes its appeal to the whole public for such sufficient and permanent aid as will enable it to continue its operations.
Much money is wanted. A fund must now be raised by subscription,
in some way, and placed in good hands. ‘The income alone is sufficient
for the purposes of the society, to be disbursed by the society under
such conditions as the contributors shall feel most perfectly satisfied
with. The report shows what saving has been made to the city and
State in the lessened demand for the support of paupers and convicts, who have been made such by intemperance.
Is it not better, infinitely better, to pay a voluntary tax, — a sum

subscribed which shall be applied directly to the prevention, or the
immediate and permanent removal, of a real moral and physical
evil, — than by a forced tax to pay for its indefinite and unrewarded,
unthanked support? We make of the drunkard, pauper, or convict, aman again. We labor to give him new interests in life, —to
make of him a good citizen, a good father, a good husband and son.
We seek, by the blessing of God, to accomplish a moral revolution
which the ages gone by have never witnessed. But to do such a
work, we must have means — abundant means; and now we ask for
them of those who have wealth and understand its best uses, — who

have hearts, and who have never failed to carry forward the plans
of a sure charity, of an enlightened philanthropy, — we ask them to

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

93

enable us by their noble benefactions to continue and complete our
work.
.
How a fund may best be created we do not, for we cannot, particularly indicate. Whether there shall be a meeting of citizens
to aid in that in which all have

an interest, an

equal interest,

whether the attempt shall be made by new subscriptions, or in
whatever way it may be best made, we leave to the public to
determine.
Most certainly do we hope and pray that steps
may at once be taken to begin the collection of a fund which
will secure to our cause the permanent support which it deserves
and needs.
To your sister cities and towns that we have visited
and carried the glad tidings of hope, that have seen with your
eyes by our exertions
— under God —the restoration of your sons,
brothers, and

fathers, to temperance,

in gratitude

and as a free-

will offering to God, we make our appeal to you to come forth and
assist to sustain us in this great and arduous work. As ye have
freely received, so freely give. Ye ministers of our Divine Master,
come forth to the rescue; aid us in our cause. When you ascend the
sacred desk of prayer, aid us by your petitions that our strength
and means may never fail until the monster is driven from off the
earth.

Like Aaron

of old, “take the censer, and put fire therein

from off the altar, put on incense, stand between the people and the
plague, and the plague shall be stayed.”
In February, 1845, certain well-meaning and philanthropic individuals, witnessing the benefits arising from the aid extended by the
officers and members of the Parent Washington Society to the inebriate, and feeling the great benefit that would accrue from the
establishment of an inebriate asylum, memorialized the legislature
of the Commonwealth for an act of incorporation, organizing and
establishing an institution of that kind; extracts from which memorial we have made as they appear in the legislative documents of the
House for that year.
“The

undersigned,

inhabitants

of the county of Norfolk,

have

noticed, with great satisfaction, that an order has been submitted
to the House of Representatives by one of its members, Mr. Charles

G4

A VOICE

Wade, of the city of Boston,

FROM

THE

in relation to the founding of an

asylum for the temporary -relief of that large class of misguided
persons who so frequently render themselves obnoxious to the laws
by the vice of intemperance.
“It would be the desire of your petitioners to present the true
condition of the unfortunate class referred to, with much greater
particularity than is usual in the customary form of a petition.
The subject calls for a memorial. It is believed that the present
method provided by law for the guardianship and punishment of
victims of intemperance, imperatively calls for investigation. It
is believed that the largest portion of this class, who are, according
to our present laws, now locked up in jails and houses of correction, and lost to their families, to society, and to themselves, may be

restored to usefulness and respectability by the establishment of
a State Asylum expressly devoted to their cure; an asylum to which
every man, irrespective of position in society, who has fallen a victim to the cup, may be conducted as to a place of safety; an asylum
in which shall pervade the influences which brace up and purify the
mind rather than degrade it; an asylum which shall restorea fallen
brother to complete health, and impart to him ability, when he leaves
its walls, to move

forward with courage

and with hope, and undis-

mayed by the odium which, as the occupant of a house of correction,
and the companion of felons, he is conscious will ever cling to him.
In order, gentlemen, to bring the subject into closer view, your
petitioners invite your attention to a few facts.
“ Early in the year 1841, a society, now known as the Parent
Washington Total Abstinence Society, was formed in the city of
Boston. From the period of its formation to the present time, it
has sustained a commodious hall for holding public meetings. But
the society had a higher object in view. Large numbers of persons,
in various stages of intoxication and destitution, who have been
found in the streets and elsewhere, have been led to Washingtonian
Hall, where they have been kindly received, and their necessary
wants supplied. The amount of service which has been rendered
within the last four years, by this society, cannot be readily appre-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

95

ciated. A multitude of men who, by intemperance, had been shut
out from the friendly regard of the world, found in the hall of the
Washingtonians, for the time being, a comfortable asylum; and these
men departed thence to resume their position as useful citizens.
About 750 of such persons have found a temporary home at Washingtonian Hall, during the year just closed, nearly all of whom, it
is believed, are now temperate and industrious members of society.
The expenses of this establishment have fallen principally upon the
members of the Parent Society, many of whom are poor men, and
have little to spare from their earnings, but who contribute their
utmost to sustain a humble asylum, within whose walls are put into
operation the Samaritan principles which caused their own reform.
Most of their valuable time, too, do these men give to this noble
work, without the slightest pecuniary reward; and their devoted
secretary, all of whose time is given to this great reform, has received but an insignificant sum for his untiring and invaluable services.

The managers of this establishment

have, under God, saved

the lives of many of their fellow-men. They have restored to their
families a very large number of grateful human beings who, but for
their philanthropic efforts, would now, without doubt, be wanderers
and vagabonds on the earth, or occupants of the house of correc-

tion.
“Among these rescued men have been some who have enjoyed
the privileges of a liberal education, and of a cultivated and wealthy
home. Individual but rare instances might be named, where the
honorable conduct of the wealthy friends of such outcasts has been
promptly displayed by holding out the ready hand of sympathy and
protection; but as a general thing, the poor drunkard, in the depth
of his misery and seasons of penitence has, in the touching language
of Scripture, been forced to say, ‘My brethren are far from me,
and mine acquaintances are verily estranged from me; my kinsfolks
haye failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten me!’
“ The following statement will show the actual reduction in the
commitments to the house of correction, for drunkenness, since the
Washingtonian reform commenced in Boston. In 1841 there were

96

A VOICE

FROM

605; in 1842, 541; in 1848, 456.

THE

On the first of January of the

present year the number of persons remaining in the house of cor-

rection committed

by the police court was only 123;

number, 110 were

committed

of which

for drunkenness,
—47 males and 63

females, —all other offences being but 13. It would be easy to
show the actual amount in dollars and cents saved to the State by a
a result like this, but not as easy to exhibit the blessings resulting
to the rescued men or to their families, many of the members of
which

would

doubtless

otherwise

have

become

outcasts,

or

have

found their way to our almshouses. But your petitioners forbear
further developments in relation to the house of correction, having,
it is believed, a momentous bearing upon the subject of this
petition. They demonstrate conclusively that the Commonwealth
will be largely benefited by an entire change of the present method
of commitments to the house of correction at South Boston.
“The labors of the managers of Washingtonian Hall have been
brought into distinct review, because they present a concentration
of facts of remarkable import. They exhibit, it is believed, the
great benefit which in a humble way has been conferred on society
by rescuing from disgrace and from destruction so many members
of the human family. They start the inquiry, that if so important
a service to fallen humanity can be brought about with so imperfect
arrangements and with so limited means, cannot a more important
work be accomplished by the establishment of an asylum, calculated
to carry out with more completeness and with far greater advantages
the objects which have been partially obtained under such great and
obvious disadvantages ?
“ Although particular prominence has been given to the results
which have been accomplished in the city of Boston, yet your
petitioners well know that equal efforts have been made in the
country to save men from the disgrace of imprisonment for intemperance. But such men require to be placed under a guardianship
which may cure them, and not under influences which will yet more
completely degrade them. Your petitioners believe the greater and
more efficient than all other instrumentalities hitherto employed for

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

saving the drunkard is the law of kindness.

OT

It having been demon-

strated of late, in thousands of cases, that the drunkard is yet a man,

and can be restored to health by kind words and kind deeds, ought
he not to be placed in the most favorable position for his recovery ?
Has not the word gone forth in Massachusetts, never to be again
recalled, that the poor maniac shall no longer shiver in his cage
without clothing and without fire, — that his chains shall be stricken
off, and that he shall henceforth find comfort, and perhaps restored
reason, in a State

asylum?

And what

is the drunkard, with his

periodical fits of delirium tremens, but a maniac? A shattered
mind can only be healed by skilful words uttered in tones of kindness,
— by efficient medicines administered by persuasion, and not
by force.
“ Gentlemen, we hope that none of you shall have the misfortune
to have a beloved brother a houseless wanderer by the cause of
intemperance. We hope you may be spared the sorrow in your
old age of hearing that the son of your own blood, who, in the confidence of your hearts, you have sent to the capital of the State to
acquire consideration and wealth in mercantile or other honorable
pursuits, ‘has fallen among thieves,’ and perished in the dark
lanes, or darker dens, of the city, before the good Samaritan has
searched him out and: placed him where a father’s love can reach
him and save. We hope, gentlemen, you may be spared this terrible calamity; but if, in the inscrutable dealings of Providence, a
‘child of your affections should be cast forth in destitution by reason
-of the intoxicating cup, we trust, in your wisdom, you will, with the

responsibilities of your high duties pressing upon you, see now if
such an asylum exists as the unhappy wanderer requires, which the
age demands, and which your noble State, in every other great work
of Christian charity, is amply provided with. We have not written
out the appeal of the wretched drunkard himself, who, with feeble
body and broken spirit, entreats you not to send him to the charnel
house of living corruption, but to give him a Christian resting place,
where he can put forth all his strength to burst the bands which
have bound him; and instead of going forth from its threshold with
9

98

A VOICE

FROM

THE

the mark of the prison branded upon him, that he may depart with
the strong courage which gratitude gives, and with thanksgiving to
God that he has been restored to his right mind by the strong arm
of a brother’s faith and the warm breath of a brother’s love.
“Your

petitioners,

instead

of having exhausted,

have

scarcely

entered upon, an enumeration of the advantages which it is believed
will flow from the founding of such an asylum. The only object
they have had in view was to call the attention of the Legislature
to a subject of great magnitude in its bearings, inasmuch as it is
closely connected with our present pauper and prison discipline, and
relates to the well being of the community and at least three fourths
of those who now crowd our prisons and almshouses.
‘‘In the countless number of noble institutions which have risen
up around us, in the constant exhibition of munificent charities
which are daily announced to us, a testimony has been recorded that

the beautiful spirit of Christian benevolence is an active principle in
our midst; and in presenting some of the reasons for founding a
State asylum for the relief and restoration of the victim of intemperance, your petitioners hope that the object will be considered
worthy of the careful consideration of the Legislature, and that the
growing tendencies in behalf of suffering humanity may result in a
substantial effort for the benefit of the poor drunkard.”

From the action taken by the merchants in petitioning for the establishment of a State institution, we perceive the increasing anxiety on the part of the people
of Boston— that is, the temperance portion of them —
to take some still further measures, or rather to extend
and

carry

out

the measures

commenced

under

the

auspices of the Parent Washington Total Abstinence
Society. From experience they saw the great benefits
resulting from their charitable aid extended to the un
happy and miserable drunkard, both physically and

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

tv

mentally diseased; they saw and knew the terrible conflict that must take place between the would-be reformed inebriate, vitiated appetites, and his new resolution to abstain and abandon forever the inebriating cup;
they felt and understood his new and changed position ;
they saw the strong temptations that surrounded him—
the vast influences that would be near to prevent his
reform, and continue to bring ltim down to misery and
despair. Hence they felt the necessity of rescuing him
for the time being from the bad associations with which
he must be naturally surrounded, and to weave about
him new ties which would strengthen and sustain him
in the better course he has resolved upon. How was
this to be accomplished?
By instilling in his mind a
gleam of hope.
** Auspicious Hope, in thy sweet gardens grow
Wreaths for each toil, a charm for every woe.”

Raise in his mind an idea that, miserable and degraded as he is he is not past redemption, and you have

administered to him a medicine that will operate most
powerfully in effecting a cure. His body has become
weakened by continued and prolonged debauch, and his
mental strength has in like manner sustained an injury,
losing its powers of self-government.
The diseased
organs of his stomach, habituated to his accustomed
hourly stimulant, have become inflamed and irritated,
and are constantly demanding a continuance and further
supply of the fuel that is feeding an internal fire that
soon must end in the destruction of the unhappy vic-

100

tim.

A VOICE

FROM

THE

I say, then, that the mere signing of a total ab-

stinence temperance pledge is, in a great majority of
cases, not alone sufficient. His will may be good, but
his flesh is weak. The internal fires are furiously raging within, and demanding their accustomed food. He
is ashamed to face his old companions, and feels that lie
is unworthy the companionship of his new friends.
Nervous, trembling, aid miserable, he is keenly alive
to a sense of his own degraded and fallen condition.
Thoughts of the past bring feelings of remorse, while
in the future all looks dark and dreary. How natural
then it would be for that man to seek temporary forgetfulness through and by means of that very power which
has already produced such fearful results! To cast
him forth upon the world homeless, houseless, and
friendless, is in- many, a great many instances, to cast
him out to utter and final destruction.
But now, on
the other hand, look at the means which we seek to
employ. Assuming the individual sought to be affected
by our mode of operation to be both physically and
morally degraded, his mind blinded and dispirited by
gloomy anticipations of the future and remorse for the
past, his brain irritated and frenzied by long and continued excess, and his body enfeebled and weakened
from the same evil, our first principle is to eradicate the
cause.
That being accomplished, Nature, if not too far worn
out, soon begins to assert her sway; the strife is
sometimes a long and tedious one.
As animal nature
revives and begins to assert her supremacy, so in like

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

101

manner does the mental organization grow strong.
New scenes and new associations begin to exert their
influence ; surroundings so entirely different from what
they have lately been, raise new hopes and expectations ;

the .ocular proof constantly before his eyes of the reclamation of others around him, who have sunk as low,
if not lower, than he has, but who are now toiling in
advance up the hill of salvation and security, stimulates
him to renewed exertion to accomplish his own permanent reform.
Hope, like a beacon star, gleams
brightly in the distance, guiding him on to a haven
of safety ; examples of religious exercises soften the
obdurate and stubborn heart; thankfulness for his
changed condition opens the fountains of his soul, and
causes better and purer thoughts to gush forth—
thoughts and sentiments that have long been strangers
to the man.
He can now look back calmly and understandingly upon his past life, and shudder at the
terrible gulf from which he has escaped. He begins to
find the world is not all a blank — that there are still

bright and beautiful spirits.in human life constantly
rising up along the wayside as he travels down the
pathway of time; he learns to distrust his own powers
of self-control, and put his trust in Him who controls the
universe, and who alone has power to save; he turns
with horror from the memories of the past, and strives
earnestly for the future; he feels and knows what he
has been, and hesitates to walk in his old tracks, which
lead down to earthly torment, and even to eternal despair ; he is cognizant of a trust reposed in him, and
Q *

102

A VOICE

FROM

THE

loathes the commission of any act which will result in a
betrayal of that trust; he feels that he is again a man,
and thus new-born and regenerated, he again goes forth
among his fellow-men to strive with the busy world in
the great and hard-fought battle of life.
In the State of New York already has the BOS o
and want

of such an institution been felt; the matter

has been taken in hand.
At Binghamton a large
building has been commenced under the auspices of
the State for the accommodation of that class of unfortunate persons who have suffered through, and by
means of, intemperance.
The officers of the institution
have already been flooded with applicants for admission
from more than ten times the number that the building
will be able to accommodate when finished. In regard to its progress, we copy an article from the New
York ‘Illustrated News,” of January 14, 1860.
“The erection of the Inebriate Asylum, at Binghamton is but
slowly progressing. If ever a charitable institution was needed this
is. Over three thousand applications have already been made; but
who can judge of the increase of this number when the building shall
have been opened for the reception of patients? Our little world
hereabouts knows well the character and effects of the poisonous
enemy they ‘ take to their mouths to steal away their brains ;’ and
yet steadily do they partake of it, and steadily is intemperance on
the increase. Surely nothing more fully establishes the necessity of
a fostering guard over the poor inebriate, when his or her total helplessness becomes so apparent on our taking into consideration their
headlong plunging into destruction.
Genius lies prostrated, health debilitated, beauty and virtue desecrated, and. unconscious crime committed by vile poisons that are so
widely sold under the name of liquor.

While the charitably disposed

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

103

and foresighted members of our community are unable to curtail
the cause, let them use their best efforts to soothe the sufferer,
lighten the effects, and restore the lost in a reformed state to society.
“Governor

Morgan says, in his message, that some $75,000 more

are needed for the completion of the Asylum. Aside from what
the legislature may be enabled to accomplish for it, what might
not our public philanthropists do to aid it in its ‘consummation
devoutly to be wished for?’

We throw out the hint for them

to

act upon.”

We have understood that, in addition to the sum of
one hundred thousand dollars which the State originally donated to the trustees and commissioners of the
New York State Inebriate Asylum, they have by act
of legislation been put in the annual receipt of funds,
by means of a per centage levied, to a certain amount,
upon all the moneys received by the different commissions of excise, paid by those applying for and receiving licenses throughout the State.
As to the peculiar mode of treatment that is to be
introduced in that asylum, we cannot speak truthfully
and knowingly; yet from the information we have
gathered, we are led to believe that the course of
treatment proposed there is radically opposed to the
means employed in the Washingtonian Home; one
of the leading features of the Home government being
the entire absence of any compulsory restraint upon
the movements of the inmates, they being allowed to
go and come at pleasure,— walking the city, and going
and coming at will, under the sacred parole of honor
that they will strictly observe the very mild and salu7

104

A VOICE

FROM

THE

tary laws of the institution of which they are inmates
and members.
And rarely is that parole of honor
broken.
But we shall enter more particularly and in
full detail, when we come to speak of the Washingtonian Home, which will occupy all the subsequent
portion of our work.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

SrAPTER

V.

105

‘“‘ Lift up, lift up the standard,
And plant it by the well;
And, gathered underneath its folds,
A choral anthem swell.”

WE have now arrived at that point in our work
which we originally intended should be the res geste
of our labors. Since the Washingtonian Home first
went into operation,—which, at the time of its organization, was known under the cognomen of the
Home for the Fallen,— much interest has been manifested by the friends of temperance, and by the public
generally, to know how and in what manner the institution was conducted ; and how, judging from those
members who have graduated from that Home,—
bright pearls, as it were,

rescued

from the mire,—

depraved and demoralized men who were long since
considered beyond the pale of hope, have been reclaimed from their almost helpless degradation and
misery, and again restored to their homes and to the
circle of their friends.“ Men who are now occupying
high and honorable positions in society, of almost all
grades; and all the learned professions have left their
old Alma Mater, rejuvenated, renewed, -and reédu-

106

A VOIOER

FROM

THE

cated, and are now living evidences of the success and
prosperity of the Institution. As yet but a nucleus
has been formed of what we expect the Washingtonian
Home to be in time. But as limited as their means
and accommodations are at present, and as little effort
as has been made to extend its name and herald forth
its objects, yet, in its infancy as it is, there has gathered beneath its fostering wings bright and brilliant
intellects from the north and from the south. Around
its family altar, in social friendship, and in the strengthening reliance of a bright and better future, have met
as brothers in affliction those who have suffered from
the assaults of Old King Alcohol—the baleful and
pernicious destroyer of mankind.
The question has
again and again been asked, What mode of practice
is adopted, what unknown medicine is administered,
that, in so short a time, works out such great and good

results? Our answer is, Give medicines for the body
and mind.
|
‘‘Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased,
Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,
Raze out the written troubles of the brain,
And, with some sweet oblivious antidote,

Cleanse the stuffed bosom of that perilous stuff
Which weighs upon the heart? ”

Extended

confidence

creates

self-reliance;

and

in

treating man as if he were still a man, he feels for himself an increasing self-respect which the fallen intem-

perate looked upon as. lost to him forever. How often
is it that individuals who have contracted dissipated

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

107

habits feel within themselves an unworthiness to associate with their equals, and yet, at the same time,
know their own superiority in intellect and mental
capacity over those with whom they are compelled to
herd. Brought upon themselves by their own thoughtlessness and self-abandonment, the tendency of intemperance is to demoralize and lower; that of temperance, to exalt and elevate. ‘‘ Drunkenness opens all
the sanctuaries of nature, and discloses the nakedness

of the soul and its weakness; it multiplies sins and
reveals

them; it makes

a man

incapable

of being a

private friend or a faithful public counsellor ; it takes
‘a man’s soul into slavery and imprisonment more than
any other vice whatever, because it disarms him of
the possession of his natural wisdom and reason whereby he might be cured and saved.
Consequently it
usually grows upon him with age. All ages and times
have evidences of its bad effects and pernicious examples.
In Holy Writ we find how Amnon was slain by his
brother Absalom when he was warm and excited by
wine.
All the great prophecies and revelations of
Daniel made to Belshazzar were drowned in one night
of wicked and wild revel and in scenes of abhorrent
debauch, while we find the drunkenness of Noah and
Lot stand in undying characters upon the sacred records
of the past. But we hope the day has come when the
dark cloud of intemperance that has, like a funeral
pall, so long hung over us is about being dispelled, and
the bright sunlight of reform shine forth to warm and

108

A VOICE

FROM

THE

gladden the hearts and strengthen the efforts of those
friends of humanity who are engaged in this righteous
and philanthropic cause.
In the winter of 1857, Mrs.
Charles Spear of Boston, the wife of a clergyman of
that city, entered, with her husband, upon the discharge of their Christian duties, in accordance with
their feelings and views, in attempting to ameliorate the
condition of prisoners, and to secure their reformation
after the term of their imprisonment had expired. In
her various attempts to secure this end she had occasion to visit prisoners, and to converse with the in
mates of the lowest haunts of infamy and vice. She,in
the prosecution of her labors, found the. most serious
drawback to the attainment of her ends was the Protean Alcohol. She therefore petitioned the legislature
of her State for an act chartering and establishing an
asylum for inebriates.
More than six thousand names
were attachedto her petition. It was referred to a
committee of the House appointed for that purpose, consisting of Messrs. Taft and Sabin of the Senate, and
Messrs. Day, Pollard, Reede, Murray, and Gardner of
the House.
Mr. Albert Day, who is now the present
acting superintendent of the Washingtonian Home,
took great pains to invite investigation before the committee. The report of the committee was favorable;
but its friends became aware of the fact that it would be
ultimately injurious to the cause to report a bill on ac-_
count of the anticipated veto of the executive for some
cause best known to himself... Her labors against the
enemy, however, ceased not; and she, now to-day, re-_

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

109

joices in seeing good fruits spring forth from the seed
which she sowed ; for there is no doubt but that, owing
to her exertions, the present Washingtonian Home owes,
in a great measure, its first origin.
|
Acting under the inspiration given by Mrs. Spear, a
number of gentlemen, in the month of August, in the
year 1857, hired a suit of rooms on the corner of Fulton and Richmond Streets for the temporary accommodation of inebriates, and commenced their operations under. the name and title of the Home For THE FALLEN.
Two months after this, on the 5th day of November,
1857, at a meeting of the friends of this project, convened for the purpose at Faneuil Hall, the Home for
the Fallen was duly organized. Joseph Story, Esq., was
called to the presidential chair.
Julius A. Palmer,
Phineas Stow, and Moses Mellen as vice-presidents.
Joseph Story, William Adams, Jr., and twenty-eight
other gentlemen were chosen as a board of directors.
An executive committee was appointed, consisting of
Albert Day, Kimball Easterbrook, John H. Beal, Josiah
M. Reed, and Daniel Allen. Daniel Allen treasurer,
John H. Beal secretary. The immediate management
of the Home was intrusted to Mr. William Wade, under
the supervision of the executive committee.
On the first day of February, in the year 1858, the
committee having procured more suitable and enlarged
accommodations, the Home was removed to No. 1 Franklin Place, in the city of Boston, and Mr. Albert Day
duly elected and installed as superintendent of the new
organization. At the time when Mr. Day first entered
10

ke

110

A VOICE

FROM

THE

upon the discharge of his duties in his official capacity,

the Home was in rather an unstable condition.

The

previous management, from the lack of means and
other causes, had not been of that character which
would tend to inspire confidence ; but the new superintendent entered upon the discharge of his duties with
his whole heart and soul wrapped up in the new cause
which he had undertaken.
He adopted a new and
peculiar policy of his own.
Kind and courteous to all,
yet rigidly just and impartial in the administration of
the Home government, he soon drew around him a
circle of stanch and sympathizing friends,
— friends
of the institution,
— who earnestly prayed and longed
for its success, yet in fear and trembling doubted the
practicability of its final continuance; but under the
new administration things took a fresh impulse, and,
phoenix-like, the Home seemed to rise a new creation
from the ashes of the past; he pursued strictly that
policy, and refused peremptorily to deviate from the
path marked out; and to that course the Home now
owes its present firm establishment and daily increasing
prosperity.
Much credit is due to Messrs. Joseph Story, Kimball
Kasterbrook, Josiah M. Reed, and Daniel Allen for
their active exertions in bringing about the organization
of the institution; and particular praise is due to Willam Adams, Jr., for his unceasing and zealous exertions
in the cause, acting as he did from the honest impulse
of a warm heart and benevolent nature, ever ready to
j

.

Set

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

111

extend sympathy and aid to the sorrowing and afflicted,
and to whose earnest and strengthening counsels, and
his good lady’s kindness, the writer has much to be
thankful for, and will ever remember.
The before
mentioned gentlemen not only used their influence, but
extended pecuniary aid in assisting and helping the
worthy superintendent in his new and arduous undertaking. Thanks are also due to Charles H. Appleton,
Esq., Franklin Snow, and the Hon. Albert Fearing for
their liberal contributions in money to aid and support
the new project. To the Rev. Phineas Stow is due
much praise for his active and untiring efforts in soliciting aid and pecuniary assistance for the Home.
Upon
taking charge of the new institution, the superintendent proceeded to invite the opinion of the medical
faculty and the friends of the enterprise at large, soliciting their views and opinions in respect to the most
judicious and successful manner of treating patients
who might become inmates of the institution, and particularly from the medical portion of the community,
in order to ascertain their general feeling in considering inebriety as a disease of mental, moral, or physical
nature, separately or collectively combined.
In reference to that appeal one communication from an eminent physician of the city of Lowell, expressing his own
individual views upon the subject in question, which
was received by the superintendent, among many others
from various sections of the country, we have taken the
liberty to introduce into our work.

112

A VOICE FROM THE
Lowe 1, Feb. 22, 1858.

ALBERT
Dear

Day, Esa.
Sir:

Your

communication of the 20th instant is received,

and I am glad to learn that you have commenced an enterprise
which contemplates the restoration of the unhappy inebriate to a
sound state of body and mind. I trust your efforts so auspiciously
commenced will be carried forward, and result in one of the benevo-

lent institutions of the Commonwealth, already illustrious from its
interest, public and private, for its noble charities, for the welfare
of the unfortunate. I have for many years been a firm advocate of
temperance, both in theory and practice, carried forward both by
the influence of the moral sentiment of the public, and the arm
of the law; prevention is the ultimate and effectual remedy, and untiring efforts in that direction are of the utmost importance, at the
same time, for the immediate relief and care of the inebriate.

I am

-in favor of an institution of your kind, and have confidence, if
properly managed, of great and final success. From considerable
attention I have paid to the subject, I have come to the conclusion,
as I stated before your legislative committee, that intemperance is
both a crime and a disease. A view, you are aware, not adopted
by all who are engaged in your good cause, but one which I am
satisfied is philosophically correct, and I have no doubt will soon
become the universal sentiment of the public. My experience with
those absolutely intemperate has not been as great as might be supposed from my professional engagements, yet my views are matured
on the principles that govern the whole subject. I judge the treatment of the inebriate, like the insane, must be mainly moral, at the

same time that he is removed from old and injurious associations.
The details of your plan, I have no doubt, are in the main substantially correct ; as to the decided state, it comes under that group of
morbid phenomena, where the cause is apparent, and when the
cause is removed, unless gone too far, the effect ceases. In some
cases, perhaps, medical treatment may be required.
I suppose a strong sentiment will be inculcated, in the mind of
the unfortunate

victim, of the importance of his decided and perse-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

1138

vering determination, not only to overcome his morbid propensity,
but also to avoid in future all associations which tend to revive
his former appetite. It is obvious that a great part of what pertains to an institution like yours, being practised, must be learned
by experience; and I judge, from reading your address, you are
pursuing a course which will lead to beneficial results. I am glad
thus to hear from you, and shall be at any time happy to render
any aid in my power to a cause which has so good an object in view.
I may be in Boston in the course of two or three weeks, and shall
be happy to call and see you.
I remain yours respectfully,
DANIEL HOtr.

The reader will observe from the above communication of Dr. Holt, that he entertains the same opinions
in regard to inebriety or habitual drunkenness, which
we have sought to carry out since our commencement

of this work; that is, that drunkenness is a physical
as well as a mental and moral disease. That the unfortunate victim of inebriety requires kindness, sympathy, and love; not force, violence, and restraint.
Since our own brief residence in the Washingtonian
Home, we have found by observation and experience,
that kindness and moral suasion, coupled at the same
time with firmness and decision, have accomplished
results which force and violence could never have
brought about. ‘There are times, it is true, when restraint becomes necessary; take for instance a man
wild with delirium, who knows not where he is or what

he does, raving in the wildest insanity, not, recognizing his most intimate friends, it would be sheer folly

and a waste of breath to undertake to reason with him
10*
'

114

A VOICE

FROM

THE

upon the depravity of his past life, or to preach to him
long discourses upon morality ; and again, would it not
be criminal to allow that man, because he so willed it,
to go forth among his fellow-men, perhaps with the

design of murder floating through his brain? In those
cases restraint must and should be used.
When we speak of more coercive measures being
employed we of course mean it to refer to men who
are sane, or, at least, if not wholly sane, are not in a
condition or frame of mind which would render them
dangerous associates for their fellow-men. As for example, I have seen an individual apply for admission
in a high state of intoxication.
Suddenly a whim
would seize him that he was under restraint. Instantly
he would fly into a fury, and declare that no power on
earth should restrain him of his liberty ; perhaps throw
off his coat and prepare for a desperate struggle against
his imaginary jailers. I have heard the superintendent
smilingly address him with, ‘‘ Why, my dear fellow,
what is the matter?”
The reply would be shrieked
out, “I won’t and shan’t be kept in here.” ‘“ Why,
who wants to keep you ?— there is the door. Come,
I will show you the way out.” To see the look of
drunken and stupid astonishment which the poor fellow put on was ludicrous in the extreme. For a few
minutes he would gaze around in imbecile astonishment, and then, with a long drawn sigh, and ‘“ Well,
T’ll be blowed if this don’t beat cats,’ sink back, overcome, into the nearest chair. “I say, mister, hain’t
this the Home ? — the Washingtonian Home, I mean.”’
.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

115

“Yes, this is the place.” ‘ Well, but I mean that
place down there in Charles Street, where they cure
drunkards,
— where they have some kind of a way
to get the whiskey out of a fellow.” “This is the
place, my friend. You are there now.’’ “Is this the
place? Well, what are you going to do? Don’t you
lock a chap up. That kind of a dodge won’t go down
with this child. I won’t be restrained of my liberty.”
“We don’t intend to restrain you, sir. If you wish
to stop here, and try to reform, you can do so, and
we will do all in our power to aid you. We keep no
one here against his will. You can act your own
pleasure. If you have a wish to reform, this is the
place for you.” ‘“ That’s just my gait. Say, old chap,
ain’t you going to treat? ’’ The superintendent almost
invariably treats his intoxicated guests who come to
remain with him. A glass of wine of ipecac is swallowed with a relish. Soon its effects appear in a very
different character from what was anticipated, and the
noisy, howling, and turbulent inebriate becomes as
docile as a lamb and almost as helpless as a child.
With returning consciousness he retains a dim recollection of the past. Visions of the kind treatment he
has received rise up before him. If he indeed is sincere in his desire to reform, he immediately resolves to
become obedient and submissive to the wholesome rules
of the institution, and to obey strictly the injunctions
of those who are so much more able to judge of his
own condition than he is himself. The temptation is
often — yes, almost always — fearfully strong.
The

116

A VOICE

FROM

THE

effects of the liquor which he has taken having be-~
come exhausted, his nervous energies stretched to
their utmost tension, his brain throbbing with its overtaxed action, and the poor, wearied heart beating the
devil’s tattoo, it requires a strong mental and moral
determination to abstain from the temporary relief, but
final enemy’; yet, even now, no restraint is employed.
No locked doors, no prison bars, no galling and sickening chains confine his limbs. If he has not in his own
heart the sincere and ardent wish to reform from his

past wicked habits and to henceforth lead a new and
upright life, he can again go forth to mingle with his
old associates in misery and sin, and with them drift
down the river of ruin, and finally out upon the black
and leaden sea of everlasting perdition.
The principle of practice adopted and carried out in
the Washingtonian Home is that the elements of a
man’s reform must be in his own bosom, —that the
seed must be there, yet it may lie dormant and inactive, but kind influences and associations warm it into
life, and leave it to germinate and flourish to maturity,
so that in the end it brings forth its fruits. In some
cases the seed must be sown; but generally it already
lies buried, and requires only genial sunshine and
heavenly showers to bring it forth in strength and
beauty. But the struggle has yet to come.
Perhaps
abused Nature cannot withstand the shock. She sometimes bitterly retaliates upon him who has so wickedly
and pertinaciously outraged her laws. Now comes the
trial. The poor wretch, loathing the past and dreading

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

LF

the future, looks forward with fear and trembling to
the chances of approaching delirium.
Suppose him
to be seized with that most terrible of all disorders, aud
imagine him, if you can, tormented with legions of
devils standing around his bed, whispering in his ear
thoughts of murder, and telling him that his kind
nurses, who with watchful care and wakeful eyes are
standing around his couch, are his tormentors, and if
he can effect their destruction he will be free, — pointing out where lies a concealed knife or other weapon
with which he can accomplish his purpose.
Strange as
it may appear, these things have been seen and heard,
and related to me by individuals who have recovered
from delirium tremens.
I ask, would it be wise or
prudent to let that man go forth to work out the
promptings of the evil one, and in his frenzy perhaps
destroy himself or some inoffensive person?
These
only are the cases where restraint and physical force
are used by the officers and attendants of the Washingtonian Home.
The best history of the institution, and of its operations during the time of its location in Franklin Place,
can be found in the Report of the Association, dated
May 1, 1858, that being the first report of their transactions ever given to the public. That Report, together
with their then existing constitution and the by-laws
by which they were then governed, we here give in
detail, as follows : —

, ) oe

118

A

VOICE

FROM

REP

ORT.

i: .

ges;

&

THE

The Executive Committee of the Home for the Fallen take pleasure in announcing to its friends and the public the continued prosperity of the institution, and the gratifying progress of the cause it
is intended to promote. A very great advance has been made since
the initiatory steps were taken to establish this institution in August
last; and notwithstanding the discouraging circumstances under
which the organization was effected, the extremely limited means,
the jeers of the hostile, the opposition of enemies, the cold encouragement and ever dismal forebodings of the benevolent and friendly, the
enterprise has been crowned with a success far beyond any thing
anticipated, even by any of its most sanguine advocates.
As the institution is yet in its infancy, and in order that its merits
may be brought more prominently before the public, we deem it
advisable to embody in this report some extracts from a brief address, published on the first of January last, as illustrative of the

object had in view in forming the association, and as was deemed
the imperative necessity of some organization of the kind in aid of
the unfortunate inebriate.
“In the summer of 1857, a small number of gentlemen taking into
consideration the injurious and devastating effects of intemperance in
the community upon all classes from the highest to the lowest, and
particularly upon those whose abilities, kindly dispositions, attainments, and position in life might, if it were not for their unfortunate
attachment to the cup, make them ornaments to society and a benefit
to all those who might come within their influence ; and believing that
many such might, by the aid of sympathy, kindness, and proper influence, be brought to view their sad career in its proper light, so
that they would reform and be restored to their families, their friends,

and to society —with this view they formed an association for the
reclaiming of such persons under the name of the ‘Home for the
Fallen.’
“ Rooms were immediately taken at the corner of Fulton and Richmond Streets in this city, and although there were many disadvan-

7

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

119

tages connected with the locality, the want of arrangement of the
premises, and various other objections, yet at the time it was the
only available place to be obtained. An appeal to a generous public was at once made for aid, which was sufficiently responded to
to warrant the throwing open of the Home for the admission of
applicants. With these auspices the experiment —for it was nothing
more
— of reforming the inebriate upon the principle suggested by
the managers of this model institution, was commenced, with what
success will presently be shown.
“ Applicants for treatment immediately presented themselves,
and it
was soon demonstrated, beyond the possibility of a doubt, that this
system of reformation was precisely what was required to meet the
peculiar viewsof the inebriate.
“It is a well established fact that coercion will avail little or nothing
in reclaiming drunkards. They are, as a general thing, sensitive and
possessed of all the finer qualities that constitute the man; and any infringement upon what they deem their inalienable rights, only serves
to sink them still deeper in the pit of degradation into which they
have gradually and almost unconsciously fallen.
These natural
qualities are only for the time stultified, not annihilated ; and it only
requires a real expression of sympathy to make this apparent. We
do not wish it understood that we stand before the public as an apologist for the drunkard; but we assert the conviction, that in a majority of cases the unfortunate inebriate is more sinned against than
sinning ; —as we have yet to see the first man who commenced his sad
career of intemperance by taking the first glass, who did so with the
remotest intention of ever becoming a drunkard. The pernicious
habit of indulging in the social glass increases with the indulgence,
till the victim becomes enslaved and he yields every thing that is
noble and good to his depraved and insatiable appetite. ‘The result
is obvious,
—wealth, social position, home, family, friends, and peace

of mind, are all sacrificed, and he becomes an outcast, a prey to the
terrible remorse of conscience that is almost unendurable ; and yet,
left to himself, he has not the moral courage even to make an attempt
at reformation. However keenly he may realize his situation, and

120

A VOICE

FROM

THE

however apparent the inevitable fact, of which he is but too well
aware, that he is hastening to impending destruction, still appetite
must be satisfied to the exclusion of all other considerations. Every
reformed man of whom we have any knowledge, or who has given
in his testimony on this subject, will bear us out in this assumption.
There are times in a drunkard’s more sober and penitent moments
when even a kind word will touch the sympathetic chord, causing a
fountain of gratitude to well up in his very soul, that will do more
towards his reformation than all the bars and bolts in Christendom.
The human heart requires sympathy. This is the key to the unparalleled success which has attended our humble efforts put forth in
behalf of our unfortunate fellow-beings.
“In this connection it may be asked, What particular discipline is
adopted by the institution? The answer will be brief. Take for
example the poor outcast, who has long since been ignored by his
friends, and whose life has become a burden to himself, imbittered

by the constant reflection of what he once was, and contrasting his
former respectable position in society with his present degraded one,
whose miserable existence is daily and hourly eked out in filthy grog
shops, subjected to the kicks and buffets of the vulgar, and having
lost all hopes of happiness here or salvation hereafter. Take such
a one,— and we have many such, the case is not overwrought,—
accord to him the right hand of fellowship, let him feel that he is
once more

a man, and, in nine cases out of ten, the groundwork

for a permanent reformation is laid. Little else is found to be
necessary for the treatment of inmates other than moral suasion,
a sympathetic assurance of equality, confidence, and brotherly love.
They are treated in all respects as members of a well-regulated
family. Attendance at the temperance and prayer meetings in the
Home and at some church on the Sabbath is desired, yet only yoluntarily enforced.
Every.thing of a sectarian nature is strictly
avoided ; the inmates are not questioned as to their religious creed;
but in this respect every man is allowed the free exercise of his own
conscience.

The rules of the establishment are few, and such as to

give very general satisfaction.

jh aia th
pees

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

121

“ During the six months of the temporary occupancy of the rooms,
corner of Fulton and Richmond Streets, the institution gradually
acquired friends; and during that time a very large number of
persons, including men of various callings, and embracing almost
every profession in life, were admitted, reformed, and discharged
with hearts full of gratitude and a firm determination to live and
die sober men;

and, in most

of these cases, there is every reason

to believe they will, as many of them frequently visit the Home,
accompanied by their happy wives and children, to whom they are
once more united.
“Tt was obvious from the first that a more commodious building
should be procured, that the area should be enlarged in order to the
better

accommodation

of the inmates; the crowded

state

of the

rooms rendered such a step absolutely necessary, not only as conducive to health, but that the inmates might be provided with separate sleeping apartments, and also for the purpose of promoting
the true system and design of the treatment of the inmates, inasmuch as they not only desire, but absolutely require isolation and
solitude for a few days after their admission; this is particularly
the case with those who are enfeebled, or those who arrive in the

incipient stages of delirium tremens. Other conveniences were also
deemed necessary, such as a reading-room, library, bathing-room,
&e. But for months, notwithstanding our untiring efforts, we were
unable to procure the requisite accommodations without exceeding
what our limited means would warrant. At length we were fortunate enough to obtain a conditional lease of the house No, 1 Franklin Place, and although the accommodations are not so extensive
as we could desire, still, under ‘the circumstances, we felt ourselves

in duty bound to accept them.
** We removed to our present location on the 30th of January, and
Albert Day was appointed superintendent, under whose supervision
the institution has prospered beyond all precedent. Friends of the
institution have come to the rescue with substantial aid, and a generous public has nobly responded to its necessities, enabling us to
enlarge our sphere of action, and giving abundant evidence that the

11

122,

A VOICE

FROM

THE

Home, started as an experiment, will become — and deservedly so —
a permanent institution of the city. Already its influence is being
felt throughout the Commonwealth, and eyen the sister States are

sending their unfortunate sufferers, through the effects of intemperance, to the Home for treatment.

“ We already find the necessity of more extended accommodation,
and could we treble the present size of the establishment we should
be overrun, for applicants are eagerly waiting an opportunity to partake of the advantages which the establishment affords. While we
regret the necessity for an institution of this kind, and hope the day
is not far distant when the need of it will no longer be required,
yet as intemperance exists in the community to such an alarming
extent, we rejoice that the friends of the inebriate sympathize with
him in his misery, and are disposed to lend him a helping hand, that
he, if possible, may be extricated from his degradation. Let it not
be believed, as many persons are too prone to suppose, that the
victims of intemperance, as a. general thing, are men of low and
degraded minds, of little mental force or obtuse sensibilities, fit only

for the house of correction. Far from it; our knowledge of facts
connected with the past history of many who have been inmates,
warrants us in saying that they had been ornaments to the society
in which they moved; had been surrounded by friends; were of
excellent education, superior abilities, and of no small experience in
the walks of life — having held offices of responsibility and trust ;and
many persons would find it difficult to believe, were they to see these
men busily engaged in their various avocations, that they had ever
found it necessary, through the evil effects of intemperance, to become inmates of the Home.
“Tt is a source of very great satisfaction to the managers of the
institution, that their labors have been crowned with such general
success. It cannot but be expected that backsliders will now and
then be found; but we are happy in being able to say that only a
small percentage thus yield again to the tempter. Out of the several hundred men who have been benefited by the institution, we

cannot name ten who have violated their pledges.

This in itself

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

123

speaks volumes in favor of the benefit conferred upon those who
graduate from the Home. We use the word graduate, for it is used
by the inmates themselves, who are not ashamed of the appellation,
though they deeply regret that through intemperance they found it
necessary to avail themselves of the use of the Home; still they
feel a conscious pride that they have been redeemed from the slough
of degradation, and are enabled to go forth in the community as
men clothed in their right minds, living monuments of the advantages accruing from this institution. That the knowledge of a
man’s backsiiding, after having tasted the sweets of total abstinence,

and after exciting our hopes that he had become a reformed man,
casts a gloom over our exuberant spirits, we admit. But as it is
written, “the sow will return to her wallowing, and the dog to his

vomit,” so even will some men bearing the impress of Deity return
again to their destruction. We, however, derive some consolation
from the knowledge that these are only exceptions to the general
steadfastness of the multitude; but how much more satisfactory
would it be could we, with truthfulness, chronicle the gratifying intelligence that all were saved, with not a single case to mar the
beauty of the otherwise untarnished picture. Notwithstanding our
confidence in the stability of human nature may be somewhat shaken,
the backslider is again received into the fold, the same hopes excited without discouragement; for so far many have been saved who,
‘previous to their coming to the Home, had repeatedly violated their
“pledges, and whose cases were considered hopeless.
“We have confidence to believe that the method adopted by this
institution for the treatment of patients works admirably, and thus
far we have seen no good reason to discard it, as we can conceive
of no other mode that possesses equal advantages, or that the result
would be so beneficial. We have arrived at our convictions from
observation and experience. When once an habitual drunkard gets
his system in some measure purified from all noxious stimulants, he
is then in a proper frame of mind for reflection—so studiously
avoided by the inebriate——on his unhappy condition, and the painful though salutary reminiscences of an ill-spent life. Thus by

124

A VOICE

quiet, solitude, remorse,

FROM

THE

and repentance, together with the exam-

ple of others, appropriate reading, temperance, and religious meetings, a solid foundation for a permanent reform can be established,
and

determined

resolution

superinduced.

In this frame

of mind,

any man who wishes or has a desire to reform, is very willing to
listen to the truth and receive advice; and it is a very easy matter
to convince him that a vast portion of human misery, including
poverty, disease, and crime is induced by alcoholie or fermented
liquors as beverages. In fact this his own sad experience has
already taught him. The next point to be gained is, to convince
him that, although he has been accustomed to such drinks no matter
for what length of time or to what extent, he can with perfect safety
discontinue them entirely and at once. Examples are not wanting
to whom we can refer as living evidences of this, to them, important
truth. They gradually feel that what others have done they can do;
that, after all, the whole difficulty is a disease, which simply needs
correcting, and that it is unmanly to gratify a debased appetite, and
prostitute all that is worth living for in this world at the shrine of so
base a thing as rum. A spirit of emulation is engendered among
the inmates, and each one gives countenance and strength to the
other.
“The prayer and temperance meetings which are held in the
Home are not without their interest and influence, not only upon the
inmates but upon others who attend them. These family gatherings are productive of a vast amount of good. The inmates participate, and the relation of their experiences is not the least interesting
or instructive feature of these assemblages. We can truthfully say
that we have never listened to more effective or powerful lectures
upon the evils of intemperance than we have heard from the lips of
some of the inmates of this institution,
— men fully competent by
education and experience to address any audience in the land, —who
will yet serve as powerful auxiliaries in the cause of temperance, and
who will put their shoulders to the wheels of the temperance car
and urge it forward on its onward course. When we listen to such
touching appeals, coming from eloquent and grateful lips, we must

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

185

confess that we feel a conscious pride in the reflection that this institution has been the humble means, under Providence, of rescuing
such men from the gutter and placing them in positions where they
can be a benefit to their fellow-men, useful and exemplary citizens,
and ornaments to society.
“The inmates regard the institution more in the light of one

of the best of schools, than in any other; for they justly consider
that, independent of the various branches taught, they have ocular
proof of the devastative power of alcohol in all its horrible phases.
Fearful cases of delirium tremens are constantly under treatment;
and the sufferings of their fellow-mortals, of which they are eyewitnesses, is enough of itself to wean them from the intoxicating
cup,
— realizing, but too vividly, that by a continued indulgence
they would hardly expect to escape so terrible an infliction.
“ Considering the large number of cases of delirium tremens we
have been called upon to treat,
— many of them brought to the
Home as a dernier resort,—we congratulate ourselves that our
mode of treatment has been so far signally successful. Only two
deaths

have

occurred, one of which was on the 9th of last month.

This was of a man about thirty-five years of age, who was
brought to the institution two days previous to his death. He was
in a horrible condition, and it was apparent that his life was fast
passing away. All that could be done for the poor man to alleviate
his suffering was done. Homeless and friendless, he was thrown
upon our hands to die. The immediate cause of his death was congestion of the lungs, induced by excessive drinking and exposure.
He was one of that class of men who almost literally live on rum, to
the exclusion

of food, and even

shelter; and, as a fearful conse-

quence of such a mode of living, he paid the penalty with his life.
“ Visitors

at the Home who have witnessed some of the extreme

cases that have been under treatment, have been astonished at the

successful termination of them; and if testimony were wanting to
corroborate our assertions, we have abundance of it in the men
themselves who have been the recipients of our method of treatment.
The more we become acquainted with the intemperate, particularly

i‘

126

A VOICE

FROM

THE

with those whose appetites have obtained the ascendency, the more
we are convinced that they should be treated as invalids rather than
as criminals. We do not by any means hold that they are blameless, or that they are not sinful, or even criminal; yet, as society is

constituted, and the social glass is permitted by fashionable usage
to pass unrestrained, surely we should look with some degree of
compassion upon those of our fellow-mortals who are unconsciously
led on, step by step, till appetite assumes the sway. If intemperance is both a disease and a crime, it may be asked where the
line of demarcation is to be drawn. This we shall not attempt to
define.
* We cannot express our views of the subject under consideration
more to our convictions of what we believe, than by quoting a passage from a work by the celebrated Dr. Carpenter, on the Use
and Abuse of Alcoholic Liquors. In speaking of a species of what
he justly calls insanity produced by the use of intoxicating stimulants, he says: ‘The patient is incessantly under the most overwhelming desire for stimulants. He will disregard every impediment; sacrifice comfort and reputation ; withstand the claims of
affection, consign his family to misery and disgrace, and deny himself the common necessaries of life to gratify his insane propensity.
In the morning, morose and fretful, disgusted with himself and dissatisfied with all around him, weak and tremulous, incapable of any
exertion either of mind or body, his first feeling is a desire for
stimulants ; with every fresh dose of which he recovers a certain
degree of vigor both of body and mind, till he feels comparatively
comfortable. A few hours pass without the craving being so strong;
but it soon returns, and the patient drinks until intoxication is produced. Then succeeds the restless sleep, the suffering, the comparative tranquillity, the excitement, and the state of insensibility;
and unless absolutely secluded from all means of gratifying the pro-pensity, the patient continues the same course till he dies or becomes
imbecile.’

It must be remarked that in these forms of the disease

the patient is perfectly incapable of self-control.

* Arguing from such high authority, we may be emboldened to

ite tee ng \eee

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

|

127

press our claims upon the public for material aid to carry on the
great work in which we are engaged; and we have every reason to
hope that so soon as the merits of the institution shall be better
known in the community, friends and assistance will not be wanting
to enable us to extend our operations, and, if need

be, enlarge our

quarters to the capacity required for the accommodation of all applicants who may be in want of our services.
« As we have before stated, the institution is not sectarian; yet we
have deemed it necessary that the religious element should strongly
predominate, convinced, as we are, that no reform, however

merito-

rious, can well succeed unless it is founded on the broad principle
of Christianity. Blessed with the approving smile of Heaven, the
Saviour for our patron and guide, we may feel assured that our
good work must continue to prosper; and that we shall not only
continue to redeem the unfortunate from their degradation, but be
the instruments of pointing them to the way of their eternal salvation. Already we have reason to abundantly rejoice in the conversion of many of the inmates who, prior to their coming to the
Home, were in spiritual darkness; and in bringing back others from
the error of their ways who had fallen from grace, we sincerely
feel that we have been signally blessed; and to the Giver of every
good and perfect gift we ascribe all praise.
“Of the utility of the Home, and the necessity of its perpetuity, a
moment’s reflection will convince the most sceptical. Bear in mind
the large number of drunkards that already exist in the community,
and the enormous number of grogshops that are daily manufacturing
more, swelling the ranks of the outcast to such an extent as almost
to stagger belief,
— glance over the statistics of the various reports
upon this crying evil, and then say, Does not the exigency of the
times require such an institution ?
“ We are endeavoring to restore to society, by praetically illustrating
true philanthropy and Christianity, our unfortunate fellow-men, who
have been hurled from their high position by the demon Intemper-.
ance. Can our efforts be looked upon with cold indifference, or shall
we be sustained?

128

A VOICE FROM THE

«Since the removal, — now three months since,

— we have had in

the institution under treatment over one hundred patients ; and could
the public see, as we have seen, the incalculable benefit conferred

upon these men, — and in consequence, upon society, —all existing
doubts as to the need and usefulness of the Home would be removed. There are now twenty-two patients under treatment, which
number fills the establishment to repletion.
‘Whereas the evils of intemperance have become coextensive with
man, — desolating the hearth, rending the family circle, bringing misery and grief to the hearts of the wife and children, severing the
bonds of love and affection, destroying all in man that is good and
lovely,— and have made such fearful progress in this our otherwise
happy land, and believing that many
— very many
— of our fellowcitizens can be redeemed and regenerated from this odious and
blighting vice by means of sympathy, encouragement, and love,—
we adopt and agree to be governed by the following
CONSTITUTION.

ARTICLE I. This organization shall be known by the name of
the Association of the Home for the Fallen.
Art. II. The officers shall consist of a president, three vice-presidents, treasurer, and a board of thirty directors, five of whom shall
constitute an executive committee, all of whom shall be chosen

annually.
Art. III. It shall be the duty of the president to preside at all
meetings of the association and board of directors.
Art. IV. It shall be the duty of the vice-president, in the absence of the president, to preside at all meetings, and perform all
other duties incumbent on the president.
ArT. V. It shall be the duty of the treasurer to receive all
moneys of the association, and pay all orders drawn on him by the
‘executive committee for the benefit of the Home. He shall keep a
full and correct account of all money received and expended, and

report the state of the finances to the board quarterly.

He shall

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

129

give good and sufficient bonds to the association, if required, and
give up all money and other property in his possession belonging to
the association at the expiration of his term.
Arr. VI. It shall be the duty of the board of directors to solicit
funds, and act as the representative of the institution, and fill all
vacancies that may occur in said board.
ArT. VII. It shall be the duty of the executive committee to
procure a suitable building or buildings for a Home for the Fallen,
and draw

all orders on the treasurer, approve all bills, and elect a

a superintendent and secretary for the Home, fill all vacancies that
may occur in said committee, and have the management of the
institution, and call all meetings of the board of directors.
_ Art. VIII. Any person may become a member of the association
by paying one dollar yearly, and subscribing to the constitution.
Art. IX. The constitution may be altered or amended at any
regular meeting of the association by a vote of two thirds of the
members present.
RULES

AND

REGULATIONS.

1. As cleanliness is a virtue, and as spitting upon the floor or
ejecting tobacco juice upon the stoves and grates is obnoxious, this

filthy habit is strictly forbidden.
2. As profanity is always shocking, even to the ears, to those who
are habituated to the vice, and particularly so to those who are not,
the avoidance of this habit is earnestly requested.
3. As the rooms of the institution are liable to be visited at all
seasonable hours for inspection, and as tobacco smoke is in many
cases offensive, this, together with other apparent objections, makes
it desirable that the rooms should be kept in order, and that smoking
should be dispensed with within the building.
4, As itis important the house should be quiet by ten o’clock,
P. M., — and this is a matter of particular importance to invalids as
well as those who desire quietness, — every inmate is expected to be in
the institution at that hour. Notice must be given of any intended
deviation from this rule.

130

A VOICE

FROM

THE

5. Punctuality at meals is requested, in order that the multitudinous duties appertaining to the kitchen may be facilitated.
6. As prayers are offered morning and evening in the hall, and as no
reasonable being can object to this feature of the institution, it is
expected that the wishes of the superintendent will be so far regarded
that he will have no reason to complain of the non-attendance of a
single individual, particularly when he is in health and within the
building. Morning prayers immediately after breakfast, and in the
evening at half past nine o’clock.
7. Finally it is expected that the above rules will be strictly observed, and that the observance of them will conduce to the well-

being of all interested.
ALBERT Day, Superintendent.

From the first of May until the month of September,
the association continued to struggle along in their old
quarters, although the cheering sunlight of prosperity
had long before dawned upon their efforts, and many
a reformed man been sent forth with his heart filled
with joy and gladness, blessed with the anticipations of
bright hopes in the future. During the summer of
1858, the applications for admission became so numerous that it was deemed expedient by the officers of the
Home to hunt up enlarged accommodations to furnish
more room for the treatment of the numerous individuals who applied to them for relief. Consequently the
building and premises No. 36 Charles Street was accordingly settled upon, and the Home was moved to that
place, where it is at present located.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

CHAPTER

VI.

Ter

** And thus, as in Memory’s bark we shall glide
To visit the scenes of our boyhood anew,
Though oft we may see, looking down on the tide,
The wreck of full many a hope shining through,
Yet still, as in fancy we point to the flowers
That once made a garden of all the gay shore,
Deceived for a moment, we’ll think them still ours,
And breathe the fresh air of life’s morning once more.”

On the fifth day of September, 1858, the doors
of the Home were thrown open at thirty-six Charles
Street. The institution was now, under the _propitious administration of the new superintendent, established upon a firm and stable foundation.
We have
gathered a few incidents of the early life of Mr.
Day, as to his connection with the temperance cause,
showing his early views, as entertained and subsequently followed up, his stanch and firm adherence
to the most rigid and uncompromising total abstinence
principles. Our limited space will not permit us to
go at any great length into the antecedents of his
life, yet we take some of his most prominent characteristics as we find them in a letter published in the
Presbyterian Witness, at Knoxville, Tennessee, in July,
1859, written by one of his reformed patients.

1382

A VOICE

FROM

THE

“ Albert Day was born in the town of Wells, State of Maine, in
the year 1821, and is therefore thirty-eight years of age, and during
the whole of the time since he could form opinions, and act in accordance with his own judgment, he has been an active combatant against
the unnecessary

use of alcoholic, brewed, or fermented liquors, and

is of course opposed to their being used as a beverage under any
circumstances whatever; never admitting artificial stimulation to be
designated as social amenity, nor the freedom of intoxication as the
ease of friendly and sympathetic association, nor the frivolity of
drunkenness as the hilarity of joyousness; conceiving it to be seldom,
if ever, requisite to ‘give wine to him that hath a heavy heart,’ and
but rarely, only, permitting ‘strong drink to him that perisheth.’ As
was his faith, so were his works ; as he preached, so he practised.

“When a boy he forswore himself all enticements to become a
bacchanalian, and commiserated the drunkard, regarding as such the
man who in health effected an object while under the least degree
of influence from a very small quantity of alcoholic, brewed, or
fermented beverage, as well as the man who failed to accomplish
his duties or execute his labors, or attain his objects, incapacitated
from the largeness of the measure of his cups and excessive frequency with which he partook of the reason-dethroning liquors. The
one and the other corresponding and bearing relative positions, as
does the patient with wild, irregularly intermitted fever, to the prostrated incompetent person who requires friendly and professional
administrations when confined with continuous fever.

“ At an age so early as just to be able to write his name, he was
enrolled as a member of the temperance society; and at the age of
eighteen he was recording secretary of the first total abstinence society formed in the State of Maine. You must be aware, acquainted
as you are with the history of the efforts which have been made by
the people of New England against the power of alcohol, that here
temperance societies and total abstinence societies are far from being
identical. His ardor increased with his years, and at every point
where

circumstances occasioned him to become a resident, particu-

larly at Sanford, Me., and Lowell, Mass., he made an impression and

WASHINGTONIAN

’

HOME.

133

left a mark which is yet exerting a positive influence in favor of the
cause he so early espoused and to which he is yet devoted.
“Ten years ago Mr. Day became a resident of the city of Boston,
in the enjoyment of a moderate income from a diligent prosecution
of his trade, but finding time to devote a portion of his energies in
alleviating the woes of the drunkard, and being identified with
almost every true benevolent move made in the city. He is no canting religionist, though a member of what is known as the Orthodox
Congregationalist church, and is eminently catholic in his views,
social, political, and theological; firm, considerate, and kind, his pol-

icy is apt to result in good, emanating as it does from a cultivated
apprehension of the elements of true happiness, sentimentally and
rationally, The native benevolence of the man, you will remember,
spoke to us, as it does to every one, the first time we had the pleasure of meeting him and looking on his countenance. And, though
it is not enlivened by the workings of the active, ardent, internal
spirit, the contour of his features can be examined in the bust which
I have obtained for presentation to Mr. Cowan, who, without doubt,

will be happy to witness the pleasure its inspection will occasion to
those interested in any thing pertaining to a good if not a great
man. He is possessed of a fair education, and sustained himself as
a legislator, representing the city of Boston. It was during the session of which he was a member that petitions, gotten up by Mrs.
Charles Spear, were presented by him praying the endowment and
establishment of an asylum for inebriates. A joint committee of
the two houses, of which he was chairman, after a thorough examination of the subject, decided favorably to the petitions, but as
friends to the projected asylum thought the dangers of an intercepting veto to be much greater than the difficulties to be encountered
at any time in passing the bill before the legislature, a bill was
therefore not proposed. But so urgent was the necessity for such

an institution in the city, that a number of individuals opened a
‘Home for the Fallen’ under their own promptings. The superintendency was intrusted to two individuals previous to the instalment
of Mr. Day in that office; but the affairs of the Home were not

12

1384

A VOICE

FROM

THE

established upon a permanent basis until they came under the administration of the present incumbent.
* After much solicitation Mr. Day left his business and assumed
the position of superintendent of the institution over which he now
exerts the care and watchful solicitude of a parent. In entering
upon a test of the experiment, instituted by the organization for the
purpose of being ready for any emergency, information was solicited
from every source capable of furnishing facts, advancing opinions,
or giving suggestions; and from the material thus derived, being
added to his own personal observation, he adopted a policy which
thus far has proved itself eminently suited to the production of most
desirable

results; and if the institution

shall ever prove a failure,

it will be because of impediments almost inseparable from associated
efforts arising from difference of opinions.”

There are many points presented in this very hastily
penned sketch of Mr. Day’s life, of essential importance
to those who may be contemplating an attempt to
effect an organization similar in its objects to this
one, the influence of which has already given joy to
many hearts, and has attracted attention from almost
every portion of the country. And it behooves all
who would emulate the effects of this Home, to fully
apprehend the fact that success will be mainly dependent upon the adaptedness of their superintendent
to his post,— his ability to apply knowledge, and his
disposition to labor in love.
One little incident in the life of Mr. Day, which
occurred early in his childhood, and which I heard him
relate before the Bunker Hill Temperance Association,
struck me with considerable force; showing what a
powerful influence the most trivial circumstances some-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

135

times exert upon the young mind, and which may
create impressions that a lifetime will not erase.
Said he, —
~“T recollect, when I was a small boy, I went upon
a certain occasion to the landing with my father. As
was the usual custom at that time, the old gentleman
stopped at the country store to get a supply of groceries that were needed. After making his purchases,
the accompanying glass of erog was called for, and
poured out.
It was the invariable custom at that

period to leave a small quantity in the tumbler for
the boy’s share; so after father had drank, he passed
the glass with the remaining contents over to me. I
said to him, ‘ Father, I shall not drink.’ The clerk
_of the store, a young man, turned to me and said,
‘That’s right, my son; never drink of that stuff, —
and he took down from a shelf behind him a sheet of
gingerbread and handed it to me.
The reason [ refused to drink was, because I had been to a temperance
meeting that had been held in our place some short
time before, and heard the speakers telling of the evils
of intemperance ; yet I believe the conduct of that
young man, in treating me as he did, was a main cause
in strengthening in me those ideas of temperance which
afterwards became the firm and unwavering principles
of my future life.”
The foregoing letter which we have introduced,
as well as several subsequent ones which*we shall
give extracts from, were written at the solicitation of
Mr. D. Richardson, of Knoxville, Tenn., by Dr. Frank

136

A VOICE

FROM

THE

A. Ramsey, who was for the period of four months
a resident in the Washingtonian Home.
Another
communication from Dr. Ramsey to Mr. Richardson,
showing his views of the government and benefits of
this institution, and some of its operations during the
summer and autumn of 1858, we have seen fit to
insert
:—
“There are great advantages in giving deeds and institutions their right
names, so we do it in love.” — Ellis.

“In the summer of 1857, a small number of gentlemen, citizens
of Boston, associated themselves

under the name of ‘ Home for the

Fallen.’ They organized to test the practicability of any attempt to
secure from degradation and incapacity the unfortunate drunkard,
and feasibility of effort to restore him to the dignity of manliness and
the ability to satisfy the moral and social demands made by society.
Impressed with the nobleness of the end desired, and apprehending
that ‘the great secret for those that enter into employments is at
first to seize upon people’s fancy by an action or principle which
some circumstances make peculiarly their own,’ they adopt as the
peculiar element of their organization, ‘ Love and Confidence’ for
one and all addicted to the use of alcoholic potations who would,
without coercion, but voluntarily, solicit the fostering care of the
association.
* Heretofore, when the friends of the poor inebriate had not
ceased attempting his rescue, he has been subjected to distasteful
espionage or confined with lunatics,—if indeed not incarcerated
with the ignominiously guilty. Such policy is ignored by the peeuliar features of the ‘ Washingtonian Home.’ These features were
adopted in the belief that the drunkard, for the most part, is possessed of all the finer qualities’ appertaining to man, and is acutely
sensitive ;and feeling his miserable degradation, any ostentatious
exhibition of greater moral firmness or claims to social superiority,
or assumption of authority from others before his associates, or may

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

13F

be his inferiors, but serves to sink him still deeper in the pit of
demoralization into which he had gradually and almost unconsciously fallen, by weakening any remaining power to sustain his
individual resolve to combat the appetite for drink. And it is the
belief that success in his reform would result from the employment
of means naturally suggested by the peculiar features of the association. These were: the opening of the Home, and soliciting the
drunkard to voluntarily enter its portals and sojourn as long as it
might be well for him to remain; never peremptorily opposing the
exercise of his good pleasure in his going out and his coming in, or
his final departure ; ever contributing, as propriety would permit,
to his individual self-respect, and administering as far as possible to
assist his applying his own judgment or capacity in whatever direction it might lead; thus he is made to feel that his equality in
citizenship is admitted to the fulness of his duties. During his residence in the Home, from love ministering to his every necessity,
always confiding in his integrity, never manifesting any doubt of
his honor; thus fraternally recognizing him as a man, his emotions
would be touched, his affections enlivened,

his determination

en-

couraged, and his will strengthened; and in the power of effort,
with the blessing of God, his redemption from base servitude would
be achieved. Thus much attained,
— sobriety prevailing, reason on
its throne, and self-respect ascending,
— then by employing every
energy to fix his sympathies for all addicted to excess, and for every
one liable to become as he himself was, — an illustration of the danger following upon tampering even occasionally, socially or otherwise, with intoxicating poisons,—
by every resort deepening his
antipathy to the vile, insidious enemy,

awaken

a noble emulation,

prompting him to work zealously in raising up others who have
fallen, and in preventing yet others from experiencing the dismal
darkness from which he has happily escaped. Thus his reclamation
would be secure and permanent; ‘friends and kinsfolk would be
exultant ; society would have added an active member; and perhaps
true, pure religion would have a yotary, and a soul be restored to
the capacity of enjoyment.

bo Pg

138

A VOICE

FROM

THE

“Under many disadvantageous circumstances, but with aid derived
from generous and benevolent citizens of Boston, the doors of the
Home were thrown open; applications were made, and the moral
and physical necessities of the slaves to a depraved appetite provided for ; and the application of the policy adopted by the institution has positively demonstrated the practicability and feasibleness
of effort for the drunkard’s reclamation to society which he might
adorn, and would certainly benefit but for the indulgence of his
appetite for drink.
“ Since the date at which the organization was rendered effective
there have been received into the Home more than five hundred
confirmed inebriates, who have left at their own pleasure or been
discharged as cured, —all leaving free from any physical ailment resulting from their previous excess which a further sojourn at the
Home could relieve, and all gave expression to their sense of freedom, and to their mental and moral determination to eschew every
temptation, and to live soberly. Of these graduates a very large
proportion have given, and yet present, good evidences of their
fixedness of purpose; and the members of the association believe,
and fondly hope, that each individual of that proportion is per- |
manently relieved from any disposition to hazard a plunge into the
slough of degradation from which he has escaped, by taking ale or

cider; and many of them decline, even from medical adyisers,
sarsaparilla syrup, alterative mixtures, blood purifiers, bitters and
tinctures, whether patented or official; the fact of their containing
alcohol furnishing them good cause to fear that the former yearnings
after stimulants would be superinduced.
“‘ All classes of society have furnished the Home with inmates.
Clergymen, lawyers, physicians, literati, merchants, tradesmen, manufacturers, mechanics, and agriculturists have graduated, and stand
proudly erect, not ashamed of their alma mater, which has enabled
them to go forth to the community as men clothed in their right
minds, though they deeply regret that through intemperance they
found it necessary to avail themselves of the use of the Home.
“Those who have been admitted have been of almost every age

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

139

between eighteen and sixty-five; but by far the greater number
have been between the ages of thirty and forty, when they were

in the meridian of capacity. About two thirds of those who have
received the attentions of the Home were inhabitants of Massachusetts;

about

one

half of whom

were

residents

of Boston.

The

remaining one third of the whole is constituted of individuals from
the several States of Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Rhode
Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Mary-

land, Virginia, Georgia, and Tennessee ; but a very few from the
British Provinces or of other foreign birth.
“ From the commencement the institution has had to depend upon
the reasonable board bills paid by those who have friends or pecuniary means, but principally upon contributions from persons whose
benevolence was from time to time enlisted in its favor by the evidence given them of the complete success of the experiment as exhibited by the graduates themselves. Many of them have been reformed, and returned to their families, which had been rent asunder

by drunkenness, and are now enjoying halcyon days, instead of days
of heart-rendings, lamentations, degradation, and want. Clergymen
have again embraced their love, from which the alluring poison of
the still had separated them, and labor with energy in their Master’s
vineyard, though humbly, ‘ watchful lest they themselves be castaways.’ Lawyers and physicians have resumed practices they had
lost because of inebriety, and have again resumed the care of the
interests of clients, and the physical, mental, and moral well being
of patients, and do not fail in their devotion to the trusts and confidence reposed in them. Literati have gone again to their labors,
and the press of the country now shows the strength of intellect,
power in argumentation, skill in combination, and brilliancy of wit
which they possess; and the ingenuity of artisans has called into
requisition again the use of tools, implements, and instruments
which had remained useless.
“The past be Death’s; the present all their own,
And Love and Joy now make the woe-worn breast
A paradise of flowers, where Peace has built her nest.’

140

A VOICE

FROM

THE

“Tt is not desired to make the impression that none have fallen,
but it is with pleasure that the fact is stated that the number is
very small, and the members of the association have not had their
faith shaken, but rather their confidence in the strength and stability
of the principles and policies under which they have labored has
been enlarged when they have inquired into the circumstances of
one of their graduates returning to the mire.
‘When leaving the Home, the associations of every one have
been, by God’s assistance, to remain firm under any condition which
might be encountered in the strife of life, and always endeavor to
keep. green the lessons learned by a residence with those who have
so aptly probed the drunkard’s wound, and applied the curative
means. But when withdrawn from the immediate operation of the
policies which sent them forth redeemed from thraldom and reéndowed with the use of their original capacities, they come under
influences not always calculated to keep active the pleasurableness
of entire freedom from drink. Not having extended to them, as in
other days, the assisting hand, the sympathetic heart, and social
commingling of those amongst whom they lived, they have sunk
exhausted from the entire absence of the pabulum necessary to their
continued existence in sobriety.
“Friends and kinsfolks must*learn, if they do not know, that
sympathy in work, and deed, and association are necessary to a man
who has subdued or dormatized an appetite that is insatiable when
started to action; and there is no truisim deserving better to be kept
in view than the saying, ‘He who gives unto others to commit faults
proves often the most guilty.’ Love and confidence, without reference to antecedents, encouragement when needful, and counselling
when desired, are essential to every reformed

man, all being but too

prone to fall into depression of spirits, producing a present listlessness and inactivity instead of indulging in revery, self-condemnation
for the past, and prefiguring a life spent as the recipient of a pity
analogous to contempt, the salient smile of derision from the purseproud or the bigot,
— whose souls have too little sentiment ever to
permit the indulgence of drink, not from the justly rich or truly

T. “gf

ae °

4%

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

141

pious, who are always benevolent and charitable,
— and in hearing
the empty congratulations of self-inflated moralists who know not
what is the source and force of temptation.
“ Those bearing relations with the reformed man should remember

that drinking men love company, and will seek with persevering
assiduity that of an individual who in former days they counted as
‘of them,’ but whom now they do not find to be ‘ amongst ‘them.’
“To prevent such a sad catastrophe as the former inebriate revisiting his old haunts in search
of relief from malice or bad feelings, frequent visitations, as if casual, — for it is true that ‘ the least shadow
of any concert in companies that are tied to rules is able to poison
things which are even the most just and necessary,’ — from a number of friends and of relatives, so systematically arranged that he
may not have reason to think that he is watched, without receiving
the social and friendly proofs of restored confidence, are essential.
And in concluding this paragraph we hope that its lesson will be
profoundly considered, as upon its positive practical application
very much depends the perpetuation of sobriety with individuals
which of course very largely involves a continuation of the Home.
“The general character of every one for whom admission is asked
is inquired into upon reception of the application, and the disposition to reform closely scrutinized, for without a sense of honor and
a desire to reform, no efforts made

here, or elsewhere, or under any

condition, will avail any thing. .
“There are but few circumstances to prevent the admission of
those who apply. First, amongst these is inability for want of room
in the house at the time of application; and those who have again
and again been subjected to the rules of the house, only again to
blast our hopes, which

are, however, kept alive so long as even a

small foundation can be commanded, are reluctantly dismissed ; and
persons who are drunkards from choice, not to drown care or seek
solace, but for the purpose of exciting a fictitious courage to brave
the dangers attending the prosecution of any felonious act, such are
invariably and without hesitation denied admission. But poverty,
in itself, is never

a reason

taken

into consideration.

.A desire to

142

A

VOICE

FROM

THE

reform on the part of the unfortunate; no odds whether he is a
drunkard using old Bourbon whiskey at five dollars a gallon, or is
only able to minister to his disease with rum at three cents a glass,
his application will be favorable at the Home.
“The success of the experiment which has been made in this institution was so apparent that the members of the last session of
the Gentral Court of the Commonwealth, by a unanimous vote, appropriated three thousand dollars, and bestowed charter privileges
as follows :
COMMONWEALTH

OF MASSACHUSETTS,

1859.

An Act to incorporate the Washingtonian Home.

Be it enacted by the authority of the same as follows:
SecTIon 1.

Joseph Story, Isaac Emery, and Thomas Russell, their

associates and successors, are hereby made a corporation by the
name of the Washingtonian Home, for the purpose of providing a
retreat for inebriates, and the means of reforming them, with all the

powers and privileges, and subject to all the duties, liabilities, and
restrictions set forth in the forty-fourth chapter of the Revised
Statutes.
Sect. 2. The said corporation may hold, for the purpose aforesaid, real estate to the amount of thirty thousand dollars, and personal estate to the amount of ten thousand dollars.
House of Representatives, March 18, 1859, passed to be enacted.

CHARLES HALE, Speaker.
In the Senate, March 21, 1859, passed to be enacted.
C. A. PHELPS, President.
Approved, March 26, 1859.

N. P. BANKs.

“On Monday, May 2, the charter was accepted; and we believe the
name by which we are now, and shall hereafter be known, to be most

appropriate ;conveying a remembrance of the love, brotherly emotions, and personal sympathies of the Father of our country, and of
those who, with giant effort, broke their own subserviency, and, being

*

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

143

themselves released, rested not until they had drawn others from
their fetters, and swelled the temperance army with thousands who
had been lost but for the zeal and labor of Washingtonians.
“ Having exposed the purposes of the organization, and views of its
members, and results attended with the limited means commanded,

it remains to ask of the people of the Commonwealth an appreciation of a wise man’s saying, ‘ Capacity without any views signifies
nothing; and great views without capacity signify but little, and
keep men in a state of mediocrity;’ so their benevolence may be
enlisted and the means furnished, giving the institution ability to
exert an influence and achieve a success commensurate with the
largeness of the object to be attained.
* Communications will meet attention from Albert Day, superintendent, 36 Charles Street, Boston.

“The details of treatment in the Home proceed from the principles
of the above statement, and will be made the subject matter of
other communications.
“The temperance movement is in Massachusetts a fixed institution,
involving as much

talent, money, and time as any other movement

which engages the attention of religionists; and it cannot be otherwise than beneficial for the people of other States to have themselves
familiarized with the modes and systems devised and sustained by the
people of this Commonwealth to combat an enemy whose field of
war embraces so vast an area as does Alcohol.”

The Washingtonian Home could now be considered
as a State institution, chartered and acknowledged by the
legislative action of the representatives of the people,
and, receiving aid from the State treasury, it became
identified with the Commonwealth.
The increased accommodations which the directors of the institution had
taken at No. 36 Charles Street were already found
inadequate to accommodate the great and constantly
increasing flood of applications that was daily pouring

144

A VOICE

FROM

THE

in upon the superintendent. ‘The unbounded success
which resulted from the treatment of the inmates was
indeed without precedent. Hundreds who had visited
the institution for the purpose of reform had left its
friendly portals reformed and cured from the loathsome
and degrading disease of inebriety, and what was most
astonishing was the fact that such a small number of
those who went forth again among their fellow-men, to
be once more surrounded by vice and temptation,
neglected or forgot the salutary lessons they had
been taught, but remained stanch and firm to the
new doctrines they had learned.
But we now are about to give to our readers some of
the practical results of the operations of the Home, by
detailing a few of the most permanent cases of individuals who have received the benefit of the Home treatment; at the same time showing their peculiar physical
and mental condition at the time of their reception as
patients, as contrasted with their appearance when they
were discharged as cured persons, and deemed reformed
men by the superintendent, and able to visit the various
and many temptations which would assail them on their
renewed associations with the world. When we speak
of renewed

associations, we

do not mean

to be under-

stood that the individual who is an inmate of the
Washingtonian Home is in any way restricted or prevented from going into any proper out-door social gathering. During a residence of four months in the Home,
the writer was subjected to no more restraint than he
would have been subjected to in any well-regulated

—

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

145

boarding house, frequently attending numerous social
gatherings, the rules of the Home only requiring that
notice of such contemplated absence be given to the
superintendent, so that provision for closing the doors
of the establishment can be made. In that principle of
perfect freedom consists the main element and fundamental basis upon which the government of the Home
is built ; for we contend that man must be reformed by
love and kindness —not by force; and that he who
abstains from drink, either from inability of means to
gratify his appetites, or prevented by restraint and imprisonment from gaining access to it, has not in fact, or
principle, taken the first step towards reform.
13

146

A VOICE

FROM

CHAPTER

THE

VII.

‘*To Temperance all our liveliest powers we owe }
She bids the judgment wake, the fancy flow ;
For her the artist shuns the fuming feast,
The midnight roar, the bacchanalian guest.”

To many of my readers who have listened to the
impassioned eloquence of Thomas M. Brown, as he,
in tones of thunder, denounced intemperance and its
effects ;or who have heard him, with a heartfelt gratitude, praise and thank the Washingtonian Home for
its instrumentality in rescuing him from the depths
of misery and despair; and as they have marked the
eye flash with the fire of genius as he entered heart
and soul in his denunciations against the incarnate
fiend,—TI say, to many it may be unknown that scarcely
more than two years ago he was steeped in degradation and sin, and bound hand and foot in the chains
of the accursed destroyer. From facts gleaned from
the records of the Home, and the personal recollections of individuals, as well as from the statements
of Mr. Brown himself, I have been able to compile a
short sketch of his most remarkable and interesting
case. Originally from the British Provinces, he came

,up to the city of Boston in search of employment,

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

147

being a house carpenter by trade. Possessed of quick
wit, and fond of social life, he soon became the leading spirit of the festive hour. Gradually, at first, he
fell into the habit of drinking the friendly social glass.
Generosity of feeling promoted excess, and he was
soon wrapped in the close embrace of the destroyer.
Year after year he sunk lower and lower in the scale
of social and moral degradation, until it seemed that
he had drained the cup of misery to its dregs. One
holy Sabbath evening, alone, miserable, and dejected,
he was wandering listlessly through the streets of Boston amid those who knew him not, who felt not for
his fall. As he moved along with that human tide,
bound on their different missions,—some to give
praise in his temple to the Most High, the King of
kings,
— some to worship Moloch at his crime-stained
altar, dyed red with the life-blood of youth, purity,
and innocence, who had gone down like grain before
the reaper, whose pale manes must haunt the memory
of their destroyer,
— suddenly upon the quiet evening
air, as if borne by pitying angels, came the glad song
of joy, Sed
“« Praise God, from whom all blessings flow.”

There are moments in man’s brief existence,
— however callous his heart may be, however warped and
blunted his sensibilities, —-when the most trivial circumstance opens the avenues of reflection and instils
thoughts that become indelibly engraved upon the

tablets of the brain.

A passing cloud, the twinkle

148

A VOICE

FROM

THE

of a distant star, which we have learned to love from
associations, the gentle sighing of the evening wind,
or the well-remembered strains of a once loved tune,
may burst the barriers of restraint, and make the
heart throb, and the eye fill with new and tender
emotions.
That heavenly strain of thanksgiving and
praise touched a tender chord in the heart of the poor
inebriate ; it fell upon his ear like sweetest music.
Onward moved his wearied feet in the direction of
those sweet strains, until the Home loomed up before
his sicht, a haven of safety and of hope! He entered
and mingled with that throng of reformed and reforming men.
William Adams, Jr.,—of whom we have
heretofore spoken,—
was present, giving his valuable
assistance in conducting the services. He took him
by the hand as a brother, and by his kind and fraternal
counsel lit up a spark that soon blazed forth in a bright
flame of undying hope. Mr. Brown remained an inmate of the Home for about six weeks, when he was
discharged, at his own request, a redeemed man.
In
connection with Mr. Hawkins, the missionary of temperance reform, Mr. Brown immediately proceeded to.
establish and build up a temperance organization in
Charlestown, which was shortly after organized under
the name and title of the Bunker Hill Total Abstinence
Association, and he was appointed to fill the executive
chair of that body. He continued to occupy all his
leisure time in advocating the principles of temperance,
until, at last, finding the calls upon him so numerous,
he abandoned his former occupation and entered the

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

149

temperance field as a missionary and apostle of the
cause. For ten long and weary years had he been
separated from his family. In the summer of 1859
they came to Boston to join the exile; and then, for
the first time, did Mr. Brown set his eyes upon his first
born child, then a boy of nearly ten years of age.
This is one of the results of the good which the Washingtonian Home has done. Who can tell the feelings of
the man when that reunion took place? Can we wonder that he should love temperance and temperance

principles?

Is it a matter of astonishment that he is

eloquent in advocating the supremacy of the principles
which have reclaimed him from the mire, reunited
the family circle which had been ruthlessly scattered
by the remorseless demon of the vine, and which had
again gathered around his hearthstone warm hearts
that beat with gratitude for the happy present and forgiveness for the past. Not only has he cause to rejoice
but the fond wife and child must bear in their hearts
eternal thankfulness and gratitude to the Home for restoring to them a kind husband and affectionate father,
to be a comfort and support to that sorely tried mother
in the future, and a staff to that child as he grows
up to man’s estate.
Mr. Brown is now travelling
under the auspices of the State Temperance Alliance,
and bids fair to become one of the first temperance
lecturers in the United States. He is now constantly
engaged in travelling through the State of Massachusetts, delivering discourses upon the subject of temperance before the various temperance organizations

18*

|

eet

150

WASHINGTONIAN

ok . nt be! ery

HOME.

throughout the Commonwealth.
In a communication
from him to the editor of “* The Temperance Alliance,”
in the December number of 1859, we find his own feelings described by himself at the time he entered the
Home.
Boston,

Dec. 1859.

Dear Doctor: The year 1859 is fast passing away; another link
will soon be added to the chain of years which binds the eternity
that was to the eternity that is to be. It is an appropriate time
to hold converse with the past, to look calmly and carefully over
the path in which we have been journeying, that we may take counsel and warning from its defeats, and courage and hope from its victories. Two years ago — how short the time appears when measured
_ with the eye of memory—I was a slave to that terrible appetite
for strong drink which has destroyed and is still destroying so many
noble men and women, sparing neither the high nor the low, the
rich nor the poor, the learned nor the unlearned.
Two years ago I found myself houseless, homeless, friendless.
O, how strong drink degrades a man. Looking back, I can trace
my fall; glass by glass, day by day, the poison sank deeper, until
I awoke from a wild, mad dream and found myself a slaye. Like
Gulliver among the Liliputians, who, while he laughed at the manikins, was bound by them to the earth; so I, too, laughed and sang,
while the tiny habit which I despised grew to a giant’s structure, and
bound

me

hand and foot, body and soul.

But, thanks to God, I

have burst the bands and am free!

How vividly that evening, that blessed Sabbath evening on which
I signed the pledge, is present with me now. After a day of untold
agony, both of body and mind, I found myself in Fulton Street, in
this city. Overcome by painful and bitter memories, I sank exhausted on the pavement. As I recovered my senses somewhat,
I heard the strains of an old tune my mother often sang to me in
the sunny hours of childhood.

O, that dear old tune, “ Sicily
;”

I never hear it now but my eye moistens and my heart throbs more

Caer ae

WASHINGDONIAN. HOME.

154

rapidly, for it reminds me of my mother and my redemption from
the inebriate’s grave. Lured by the sweet familiar sounds, I crossed
the street, ascended a flight of stairs, entered the room where they

were singing the old tune, and found myself in The Home for the
Fallen. I was saved. God bless the Home. I am not homeless
nor friendless now ; despair no longer flings her dark shadow on my
path.

No;

the old dreams, and hopes, and resolves,

the daring

thoughts, the lofty ambition, are knocking for admission at my heart
again. Yes, thank God, they have all come back. When I entered
the Home I had been separated for nine yeafé* from a wife I loved.
Yes, I loved her; but one cause separated us,—the red river of intemperance rolled between us; and my child, too, I had never looked

upon, though he was nearly nine years old. But they have come
again. ‘There is another family altar in old Massachusetts, from
whence ascends prayer and praise to God our Father for the good
cause, and to the men and women through whose blessed instrumentality the husband and father has been restoyed. The dead is
alive, the lost is found.

Alas, mine is not the only hearthstone which has been desolated ;
mine is not the only family altar which has been shivered to atoms
by this fearful enemy of mankind. O, could we but number them
and estimate the amount

of moral desolation which surrounds them,

—the cruel partings, the bitter tears, the broken hearts, the crushed
hopes, the blasted reputations; the wreck of every thing manly,
noble, beautiful, virtuous, honorable; could we but realize this
amount of misery,—but words are vain, language is imperfect

and impotent, to shadow forth these scenes of woe.

Not till we

stand before the awful seat of God will the veil be lifted, and all the

accumulated horrors which result from this blighting curse burst
upon our blanching gaze. Nor is mine, thank God, the only home
made happy, during the past two years, by the influence of the
blessed temperance movement.
Songs of praise and words of
prayer ascend to-day from many family altars, rebuilt during these
years. ‘The parted streams of affection and love are mingling again |
as of old. Husband and wife, father and childr-n are rejoicing in

152

A VOICE

FROM

THE

renewed happiness. The glorious dawning of a new day bathes
them in its holy light. Hope, like Noah’s dove, comes back bearing
the olive branch of peace. O Father in heaven, hear us, and bless
this noble cause which has wrought so much happiness around us
in the past, and gives such blessed promise in the future!
In reviewing my own labors for the past year, I find that I have
visited over one hundred and twenty towns in the Commonwealth,
and spoken more than twice that number of times, with what result
must be left with Him whose feeble instruments we are. Since
April last, when the State Alliance was launched on the sea of public opinion, I have succeeded in enrolling nearly fifteen hundred
names on its books. My efforts in this direction have been tolerably
successful, yet more can be done. We have about four thousand
Alliance members, I believe, —just about half the number we require, and will have, with God’s blessing on our labors.
Can you account for the unwillingness of professed temperance
men to labor personally in this reform? Have they put their hands
to the plough and turned back? I fear so. A man’s devotion to
any principle can be measured by the amount of sacrifice he is willing to make for it. Now there are any number of persons who
profess deep sympathy for our cause; they say it is a good cause, and
hope it will succeéd ; yet they cannot do any thing to give it success.
They are ready and wiiling to pray for it, and then they turn round
and vote against it. Witness the recent elections in this city. For
three hundred and sixty-four days the cause of temperance has
their prayers and good wishes, but on voting day they have no
time to think of it. “ Consistency, thou art a jewel.” But more
of this anon.
I notice frequently that our temperance meetings haye to give
way to almost every thing. ‘“ We would like to have you lecture,
but there is to be a negro concert, or a ball, or a singing school, or

our regular church meeting, [or no matter what,] and you had better
come some other time.” Such are the replies too often received
when an agent of the Alliance sends out his list of appointments.
Now this is wrong. An agent cannot possibly know about these

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

153

meetings in the different places he may want to visit. It is surely
not asking much, considering how seldom we can visit and hold
meetings,
— perhaps not more than twice a year in each place,—
that some sacrifice may be made by our good friends, in ordey that
this great and important cause shall have a hearing. Most earnestly
do I appeal to our. friends in this regard, that in the future no
trifling matter may be made the plea for putting off our meetings.
I find, in looking over my list of Alliance members, many who
have not paid their subscriptions. I hope they will do so at once,
and save us the trouble and expense of calling on them personally.
Come, friends, begin the new year straight.
But I have exceeded my limits, and will close by expressing my
heartfelt thanks to the many friends with whom I have come in
contact during the past year. To all whose smiles and kind and
affectionate wishes have cheered us,—to the noble men and fair
and gentle women, and the laughing, rosy-cheeked children,
— the
lambs of the flock,—to each, one and all, may God bless you and

grant you a happy new year.
Yours fraternally,

THos. M. Brown.

Is not the example of this one man alone sufficient to
show the immense amount of good that has been done
through the instrumentality of the Washingtonian
Home? -And when we reflect that his case is one
among hundreds, we cannot be too grateful to those
philanthropists who were instrumental in establishing
such a proud and noble institution ; but there are hundreds, ay, thousands, of others in the city of Boston
to-day, who are fast travelling down the same road of
ruin and despair, yet who cannot or will not learn wisdom from the sad examples which are daily set before
their eyes. They may sink miserably low, and still be
reformed;

but

trust not the chance;

for where once

154.

A VOICE

FROM

THE

a drunkard is reclaimed, thousands sink to rise no more
beneath the black and leaden waves of eternal perdition.
Mr.
, a gentleman thirty-six years of age, residing in Roxbury, Mass., where he has a large establishment in operation for the manufacture of leather, is
a man of excellent business qualifications, and had
made himself independent in his business. He was a
man of quick, nervous temperament, and, to use an expression of his own, whatever he went into, he put
through with a rush; but, unfortunately, he became
addicted to habits of intemperance, and, for the two
years preceding his admission to the Home, did go it
with a rush. So confirmed had his intemperate habits
become, that his friends became aware that he was fast
travelling down the road of destruction, and that in
order to save him, some step must be taken to induce him to abandon the fatal poison. He, too, began to realize the awful precipice upon which he stood,
and saw the terrible gulf that yawned beneath his feet,
threatening to swallow him up forever. He made mental resolutions of reform again and again; but, alas,
the clutches of the destroyer held him fast! his vitiated appetite overcame his good resolves. He toyed
with the siren, and fell conquered by her wiles. He
attended a temperance meeting at the Home on the
8th of March, 1858. The influence of that meeting
operated so powerfully upon his mind that he left with
the intention of returning on the following day, and
becoming an inmate; but, unhappily, he fell among
thieves.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

155

On the morning of the 10th instant, the superintendent of the Home, Mr. Day, accidentally met him
at one of the metropolitan police stations, where he
was lodging information
against certain unknown
parties who had garroted and robbed him. At this
time he was considerably under the influence of liquor. Through the persuasions of Mr. Day, he was
induced to accompany him to the Home, where he
remained under the care and treatment of the superintendent for about ten days.
The influence thrown
around him at the Home, together with the ocular
proof of the devastating power of alcohol, with a
sense of fearful delirium tremens, had such an effect
upon his mind, that he felt as if he could again go
forth and resume his business connections without
falling. At the time of his leaving the institution,
after his short probation,

he expressed

his conviction

that he was a thoroughly reformed man, and would not
again swerve from the path of duty. Since he has
graduated from the Home, he has remained a firm and
stanch temperance man.
He is now pursuing his
business with honor and pecuniary profit, and stands
fair and respected in the community.
He has,
since his reform, contributed pecuniary aid to the
assistance of the Home; and has, since he left the
Home, moved his residence from Roxbury to the city
of Boston, and now resides in that city, loved and respected by all who know him.
Alexander
, who was born in Maine, is fortysix years of age, and has a wife and family residing in

156

A VOICE

FROM

THE

Biddeford, from whom he had been for some time separated on account of his intenrperate habits, and his
inability from that cause to provide for them. He isa
machinist by trade, could earn good wages, and in
every way calculated to make a home happy and comfortable but for the one prevailing vice. He came to
the Washingtonian Home on the 9th of April, in a very
forlorn and pitiable condition— said he had been intemperate for years. His qualifications as a workman could
command him a situation at any time. For several years
he had managed to drag out a miserable and precarious existence; but the crisis had at last approached,
and, humiliating as the confession was, he was compelled to admit himself to be a drunkard.
Feeling his
own disgraceful position, he had, some two years before
his admission into the Home, left Biddeford, and came
up to Boston. While in that city matters, instead of
improving, grew daily worse.
For a short time he
would be comparatively temperate; but as soon as he
had accumulated a few dollars, he would again take to —
his drams, and, to use an expression of his own, would

“drink for joy.” Hach succeeding debauch united
around him the chains of the tyrant stronger and
stronger, until he looked appalled upon the terrible
condition in which he had placed himself. Remorse
fastened her iron fingers upon the unhappy man, and

soon the incarnate fiend whispered in his too willing
ear, suicide. With his mind impressed with this insane
fantasy, he walked out to the little village of Somerville, in the vicinity of Boston, for the purpose of find-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

Lag

ing a secluded spot where he might cut his throat, and
thus, at one fell blow, end all his earthly woes.
He
reached Somerville, secreted himself amid a clump of
trees and underbrush, and then, with murder in his
heart, proceeded coolly and deliberately to sharpen his

claspknife upon a stone, in order that when the blow
was struck, it would be speedy and sure. While he
was thus engaged in his hellish preparations, he was
disturbed by some laborers going to their work, when
he again commenced his wanderings.
As he has since
said, all that prevented him from striking the blow was
the fear that his body, when found, would be recognized,
and the news of his fearful end thus reach the ears of
his afflicted family.
The writer of these lines can
judge too well by fearful experience what the terrible
feelings of that man must have been. What a flame
of hell was raging in his bosom, urging him on to the
commission of the most deadly of sins; and it is to be
wondered at that suicides are not more common than
they are among that class of broken down and debauched inebriates whose’ weary existence has become
too heavy a load to bear. At the time he first became an inmate of the Home he was a _ professed
infidel and fatalist ; but during his residence there, “a
change came o’er the spirit of his dreams ’’ — the Spirit
of grace descended upon him; he has since expressed
himself that in his new-born principles he believes the
hand of the Almighty was interposed.
Mr.
is a man of considerable intelligence, and,
during the days of his prosperity and upright life, was
14

158

A VOICE

FROM

THE

loved and respected by his neighbors, who, since his
reform, have again received him with joy and open
arms.
Mr. Day, the superintendent of the Home,
visited his residence in the summer of 1859, and found
him surrounded by a happy, smiling family, and in the
enjoyment of every domestic comfort. What a contrast
between that scene
— the happy father surrounded by
his smiling children, blessed with peace and plenty, the
pure light of Christian trust and reliance shedding its
holy radiance around— and the one of the poor inebriate, lying miserable and wretched in the woods and
underbrush of Somerville, baring his throat to the
suicidal knife, and, by his own guilty hand, about to
send his unchallenged soul before the presence of his
outraged God. Is not this another evidence of the
good which the Washingtonian Home has done, and is
daily and hourly doing, to reform and redeem the poor
inebriate ?
We have taken the liberty to make several extracts from letters written by Mr.
to the superintendent of the Home since he left that institution,
which tend to show his feelings and position, as well as
his altered circumstances since he has left the institution.
In one of his communications, dated October
27, 1858, he says, in referring to a visit of the superin- ©
tendent, Mr. Day, to his place of residence, which we
have previously spoken of,—
“T received your letter with much pleasure. I had been expecting
to hear from you for some time. I was anxious to hear from our old

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

159

Home, and was glad you had arrived there again safe and sound. I
was rather disappointed in your not stopping here on your return.
I am very much obliged to you for your good advice, and shall
endeavor to strictly follow it, particularly in going regularly to church
every Sabbath, and also in being very particular in the kind of company I keep. There is but little doing in the rum trade here. I
met with a most cordial reception on my return home after so long
an absence. Persons, who, I supposed, cared not whether I lived or
died, came forward and welcomed me back, and.seemed rejoiced at
my reform, and kindly offered me any assistance that was in their
power. All my relatives wanted to see the man.who had gone so
far, and then could reform; and they particularly desired to see the
man who could bring about that reformation. I promised to show
him up, expecting you would stop on your return. If you, or any
of the officers of the Home, should ever again come this way, you
would meet with a most cordial reception. I cannot be too thankful
for what has been done for me here. I am surrounded with my family, and as happy as a man could wish to be. My wife is so happy
that she is almost a fool. She sends her kind regards and God’s
blessing to you all. Mr. Story and yourself will please accept my
kindest thanks and regards. Give my best respects to your wife,
and love to the little ones.”

In a subsequent
says,—

communication

to Mr.

Day, he

“T received your letter with pleasure, and was greatly rejoiced to
hear from you. I was much gratified to think that you still thought
of me notwithstanding I had been so long silent; but you may rest
assured that there has not been many hours since I left Boston that
I have not thought of you and the Home, and of the great debt
I owe to the institution over which you preside for lifting me up
from the depths of misery into which I had fallen, and making me
the happy manI am. All my present happiness is due to you and
to the instruction I received at the Home. I can scarcely realize

160

A VOICE

FROM

THE

the fact that I am the same individual that used to be wandering
about the streets of Boston without adime in his pocket. I have
now every thing that heart could desire —a loving wife, happy children, and ali the surroundings which can make life comfortable. I
seem to have glided back to the same place which I occupied twenty
years ago, and from which I had so miserably fallen. All seem to
treat me with respect. If I order any thing at a store, instead of
distrust being shown it is immediately sent to my house. How different from what it used to be of old. I shall probably come to
Boston this summer, as I want to look at the dear old walls of the

Home once more. Remember me kindly to all friends and patrons
of the institution, and believe me your obliged friend.”

A few extracts from a letter of Mr.
, dated
December 5, 1858, and we shall leave his case to speak
for itself: —
“T received your letter of the 29th, and was glad to hear you were
all well, and prospering in the good cause. God preserve the Home.
May it never flag in its good works until there is no more drunkenness upon the face of the earth. As far as regards myself I grow
stronger and stronger every day in living a life of temperance and
sobriety. I begin to look back and wonder how strange it was that
Icould have ever thrown myself away in the manner which I did,
and become such a drunken, miserable wretch.

I think I must have

been possessed of a devil, or something worse ; but what a contrast!

Now I find every thing around me bearing the semblance of comfort. Every thing goes on smoothly and like clock work where
things used to be all at sixes and sevens. The children are industrious and happy where they used to be idle and discontented. But
you must know, sir, that all my happiness is mainly due to you,

through God’s instrumentality, and to the glorious Washingtonian
Home.

Iam not insensible of that fact, and shall never cease to be

grateful for it. I should like very much to come up to Boston and
take you all once more by the hand. Iam glad to hear that you

, se

le

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

161

have moved into a larger building, and have increased accoinmodations. I sincerely trust it will be the means of putting it in your
power to save more of those unhappy men who have given themselves up to strong drink. I should be very happy to see you down
here either in winter or summer. My folks all send their best
respects to you and your family. Please write to me often, and let
me know how the Home is prospering. So good by, and believe me,

sir, your most devoted and sincere friend.”

The subject of the above sketch is now, at the present time, a strictly total abstinence temperance man ;
has, since his discharge from the Home, become a conscientious Christian, and is looked upon by his friends
and neighbors as an upright and persevering man, and
in every respect a good and reputable member of society, and of the community in which he lives — so much
for the influence of the Washingtonian Home.
Mr.
, from a distant city, who spent between two
and three months at the Home, was a person of about
twenty-nine years of age, a man of independent fortune, and heir to a large property; he was brought to
the Home on the 24th of April by his physician. At
the time of his admission to the Home he was in the
incipient stages of delirium tremens.
He was a young
gentleman of intelligence and good business qualifications, and had formerly been engaged in the iron business. He was a man of liberal disposition, and, amid
the associations which his love of social life surrounded
him, he soon acquired the fatal habit of drinking to
excess. Indulgence increased the evil, until he at last
became a confirmed drunkard.
Every known measure
14 *

162

A

VOICE

FROM

THE

was adopted to induce him to abandon his evil ways;
but all seemingly to no purpose. It seemed as if the
terrible and all-pervading appetite for stimulants could
not be subdued.
He had been confined in a lunatic
asylum, but all of no avail.
At last they heard of
the Washingtonian Home, and, as a last resort, determined to send him there. For several days after his
admission he suffered severely from the delirium
tremens; but nature soon rallied, and he became
comparatively comfortable. While at the Home the
principles of total abstinence were presented to him in
a new and different character. He soon began to feel
its potency ; he saw the folly and wickedness of using
strong drink, and became sensible that his only safety
lay in total abstinence; he became interested in the
temperance cause, a member of the order of the Sons
of Temperance, and felt himself as a part and parcel
of the organization; he is, in every sense of the word,
a gentleman, courteous, affable, and generous without
ostentation ; frank, and, above all, honest in his intentions and purposes. There is every reason to believe
that he has returned to his friends a thoroughly reformed man, and will live to be a comfort and stay to
his family, and an ornament and pillar to the new |
cause in which he has embarked.
Some of the communications received from him since his return to
his distant western home, show how far the good
seeds of reform have germinated and sprung forth in
a goodly growth since he has left the institution.

WASHINGTONIAN
.

HOME.
L

163
rE, June 23, 1859.

Dear Friend: I received both your letters in due time, the first
having been written the same day I wrote to you. Ido not know
that I have any thing new to tell you. We have suspended our
meetings in this place during the warm weather. Whether we shall
meet with any better success in the fall remains to be seen. I sup-.
pose you are aware that we have few places of recreation here.
Taking advantage of this circumstance a man, —a devil, perhaps, —
leased a very beautiful grove just outside the city limits, and having
fenced it in, and erected platforms for dancing, opened it under the

name of the City Park. I heard a drinking man say, a few day since,
that the opening of that Park had been a greater calamity to the people, in its short existence of two weeks, than the great fire which
occurred here a few years ago; and I think there is no doubt but that
it is a fact. One gentleman told me that in the course of one afternoon he saw no less than one hundred boys, ranging from ten to
fifteen years of age, staggering drunk. He saw, he told me, one
small boy so drunk his father had to carry him home in his arms.
He could not stand

alone, much less be able to walk.

There is,

besides this place, some four or five others just like it; and any one,
not seeing the evil, would not believe the amount of injury done.
The devil seems to have lifted the wickets, and the stream is run-

ning at a rapid rate. Some of the temperance men think it is a
good thing; that things will be carried so far that it will bring about
a reaction in the community. We have recently had an extra judge
’ appointed to the bench of our criminal court, as one could’ not
clear the cases from the criminal calendar, nineteen twentieths of

which are caused by liquor; and yet these places are allowed to continue in full blast, and. manufacture cases at railroad speed, and are
sustained by men high in station, on account of the great good
derived by the citizens from a day’s relaxation in the country.
You see temperance men have a hard road to travel; and one of
them,— a Boston man, by the way, — felt like giving up altogether,
letting sellers and drinkers all go to the devil together, and only look
out for number

one, and take care of himself.

I do not, however,

164

A VOICE

FROM

THE

approve of that; I shall do all I can to stem the tide —the best I
can; I can do no more. Remember me to your family and to all my
old friends at the Home. Write to me as soon as your business
engagements will permit.
Your friend.

He again visited Boston in the summer of 1859,
for the purpose of introducing as an inmate to the
Washingtonian Home a person from his section of the
country, a gentleman by birth, education, and position,
but who unfortunately had experienced the evil effects
of intemperance.
Since that gentleman’s residence in
the Home he has abandoned a course of living which
he has pursued for years, and to-day stands forth a
stanch and upright temperance man. A letter from
him after his return home from Boston, is of too interesting a character to pass unnoticed.
L

B, Nov. 13, 1859.

Dear Friend:
Since I came home there has been a slight moving of the waters in the temperance cause, but whether it will amount
to any thing or not remains to be seen. I hope, however, that the
seed, though sown on dry, rocky soil, will eventually spring up and

produce a small crop, perhaps a large one; you know
saying,

the old

*‘ Great oaks from little acorns grow,
Large streams from little fountains flow.”

It is not to be expected that an immediate revolution of the public
sentiment will take place, but by degrees I believe that it will come;
and although it may be some time before it takes place, that there will
yet be a strong feeling among our people in favor of temperance—
perhaps as great as you have in Massachusetts. ‘The liquor dealers.
are themselves running the thing into the ground by their shameful
and barefaced adulteration of liquors. A week ago a party in Phila-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

165

delphia sued another in Lancaster for fifty-six dollars, the value of a
barrel of whiskey; on the trial the liquor was analyzed before the
court, and shown to contain ingredients detrimental to the health of
those who drank it. The verdict of the jury was in favor of the
defendant. The most careless and indifferent are beginning to see
the evil effects produced by the accursed thing. Since I saw you
two of our most useful citizens have fallen victims to its use
— one
an auctioneer and the other a lawyer. Mr.
, the gentleman I
came on to the Home

with, knew them both.

I have received two

papers from you containing Dr. Ramsey’s letters on your place; I
shall be glad to receive the remaining ones when they appear. How
are you all coming on at the Home? We have had beautiful weather
here this fall, but to-day, or rather this morning, the ground was
white with frost. Kindest regards to yourself and family, and to Mr.
, and believe me your sincere friend.

This gentleman has, since he graduated from the
Washingtonian Home, remained firm and unshaken
in the cause of temperance, has resumed his business,
which had been almost ruined through and by the
cause of his former evil habits.
He is constantly
employing his influence and giving good counsel to

those who, like himself, are bound down by the accursed and all-powerful tyranny of the Spirit King.
Tyranny I say, for no despot, no autocrat, possessed of
supreme and undisputed power, ever ruled with such
remorseless cruelty or demanded such abject servitude
as does this blear-eyed demon of the still.
Mr.
, a member of a well-known firm in the
city of Boston, came to the Home in the incipient stages
of delirium tremens.
He had been a hard drinker
for years. Ihave heard him make the statement my-

Dt

166

A VOICE

FROM

in

THE

self, that he had been fourteen times, upon different
occasions, confined in the lunatic asylum at Somerville
to recover him from a debauch, and in the vain attempt to bring about a reform of habits. This case
shows again how useless it is to attempt the reformation of men by force; it has not, it cannot, and it
never will be done. When we say never, we of course
speak in a general way: there are isolated cases, it is
true, where beneficial results have been attained; but
generally the coercive treatment has been, and will be,
a grand and total failure. Imprisonment and restraint
- will never do it: it is so with man, it is so with animals;
“the prisoned eagle will not mate;”’ the caged lion or
the feverish tiger may for a time be subdued by confinement within his barred domain, but turn him forth
amid his native wilds and all his savage and natural
instincts will return.
Man’s appetite by prison bars
may be restrained.
That is not reform.
To accomplish that you must break the fountains of his soul,
inculcate within him a proper sense and feeling as to
his wicked course and the vast injury he is doing himself; at the same time hold up before him the mirror
of the future in its brightest aspect, bring home conviction to his mind; and then, and not till then, haye
you laid the corner stone of his reform. At the time
of his admission to the Home Mr.
had been drinking hard for a number of days. His nervous system had
become so operated upon by stimulants that he feared
to leave off his cups. He confined himself to his home,
but the propensity was so fixed unon him that he could

Pe

Pia

WASHINGTONIAN

not break off.

by his side.

HOME.

167

He used to pass the day with a bottle

At last he became reduced to such a state,

by his continued and prolonged excess, that it was absolutely necessary to desist for a time in order that his
life might be saved. He remained only a short time at
the Home, but left fully impressed with the propriety
of temperance and total abstinence principles. A letter
written by him to the superintendent of the institution a short time after he left, will show what his feelings are in regard to the Home and those connected
with it.
Boston, Sept. 14, 1868.
ALBERT Day, EsqQ., Superintendent of the Home.

Dear Sir: Ido not know in what way or in what language I can express my feelings towards you, and to those who are connected with the
Home, for the kindness that I received while I was an inmate of that

glorious institution. It has been the saving of me from the baneful cup
which has destroyed so many. For my own part, I have drank more
or less for the last twenty years. I have made my family and my
friends most unhappy. very thing has been done for me that kindness could suggest, but all of no avail. At last I was advised by my
friend, Mr. Terrill, to try the Washingtonian

Home.

I went; my

case was properly attended to; I experienced the kindest treatment,
and can now only express my unbounded gratitude for my reformation, and, with the assistance of my God, no temptation, however

strong, shall allure me again from the path of duty. I have seen
many that have graduated, and were with those who were afflicted,
and have heard them speak in the highest praise of you and of those
who are connected with the

Home —that blessed institution, which

not only saves our bodies, but our eternal souls. I wish that many
of our charitable citizens could look in upon you at your meetings
on Sunday and Tuesday evenings and see the good which you are
doing; I think it would loosen their purse strings and cause them to

168

A VOICE

FROM THE-

contribute freely to aid you and encourage you in your well-doing.
There is nothing gives me more pleasure than in attending these
meetings, and I advise all my friends never to neglect the Home.
I, for myself, feel proud that I have graduated from that institution;

it has placed me on a new platform in life; it has given me new hopes
and desires. I feel happy, and it has made those connected with me
the same. I have heard many say that such and such could not
reform. It is not so: the old and the young can be brought from
that low and degraded state of drunkenness, if he will but put
himself under your kind care and influence. May God give you
strength to speed on in your good work, and you shall have my
hand and heart to assist you in this good cause. May you have
_ the blessing of God to comfort you, and cheer you on in your good
cause. Accept this expression of kind feeling from one who feels
that he has been saved by the will of God and your kind assistance.

I remain yours, truly devoted to the cause of temperance, now and
forever.

Mr.
is now a thoroughly reformed man. He has
been chosen one of the directors of the institution,
and is a prominent, and probably the most active
member of the board. The compiler of this work has
much for which to be grateful to this gentleman in return
for the kind and frank manner in which he was treated by
him on his arrival in this city. He has, since his graduating from the Washingtonian Home, become a member
of the order of the Sons of Temperance ; passed successively through the chairs of the society, and is now
entitled to a seat in the Grand: Division. The Home
and its influences have accomplished more for him than
fourteen incarcerations in the McLean Asylum could

bring about.

Who can for a moment say the Washing- ~

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

169

tonian Home is not the best and noblest of New England’s charitable institutions?
Mr. B
was born in Connecticut, but has latterly
resided in the State of Maine, where his wife now is.
He is about thirty-six years of age, has been in the
United States army, been captain of a coasting vessel,
been in the auction and commission business, and
turned his hand at different times to almost every
thing.. He came to the Home on the 17th of August,
in a miserable and pitiable condition; he had indulged
in the use of intoxicating drink to an alarming extent;
he had, in plain language, nearly drank himself to
death. He gradually recovered, and was found to be
an energetic business man.
As soon as his health was
restored he set zealously to work to find employment.
He went perseveringly from store to store selling hand
stamps. He was doing very well at this when he was
seized with a severe cold, which settled upon his lungs,
producing a fearful cough.
He concluded to visit
Bath, hoping that change of scene and air might relieve
him. After a short stay at home with his wife, he returned to Boston, comparatively free from his troublesome complaint. He now procured a situation in the
store of Mr. HE. C. Stevens, on Hanover Street, where
he has since continued.
Mr. B
has related to the writer some thrilling
scenes through which he has passed during his drinking days. One, which happened on the day of his
admission to the Home, is of deep and startling interest. He said, —
15

170

A VOICE. FROM

THE

“On the evening of that day I was most miserable. O, how I
longed and wished for death to come and end my agony! I was
wandering about the Common, without a friend near to say one

single kind word. At last I could endure it no longer. I went
to a drug store where I was known and called for two ounces of
tincture of rhubarb, which I took; I then went down into the
Public Garden, threw myself upon one of the cold stone benches,

to think how miserable I was, and to what a depth of degradation
I had been cast down by the accursed monster. As I lay there,
thinking how changed I was,—of my forsaken wife, and the misery I had caused her,—some one seemed to whisper in my ear,
‘Suicide.’ Yes, I said, death will end all. It must and shall come.

I turned to see my unknown adviser; but I was alone. I arose
from the bench upon which I had been lying, determined by one
rash act to end all. Down through the Public Garden I went,—
thinking it would be for the last time, — on through Pleasant Street,
down through the Boston and Providence depot, and out upon the
railroad track. A stern despair had seized upon me. On I went;
I even longed for the coming train, that I might throw myself
beneath the wheels and so end all. At last I saw the breath of
the iron horse in the distance; steadily and swiftly he advanced. I
firmly buttoned up my coat, and awaited his coming. I even calculated how many minutes more I had before I should be in eternity.
On like a hurricane sped the train; the embankment already trembled beneath my feet. One instant more and the bright sun above
would be no more to me. Already was my body bent for the fatal
leap,
—— when a gentle, sighing voice seemed to say, ‘What will
become of your wife, self-murderer ?’

For a moment I tottered, as

the train dashed by; then, caught in the whirlwind caused by its
rapid passage, I was hurled, stunned, down the bank, amid a cloud
of smoke and dust.”

From there Mr. B———— wandered back to the Common, where he accidentally fell in with a person who
knew him, and who finally persuaded him to go with

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

him to the Washingtonian Home.

14

As to his recovery

at the Home we have heretofore spoken. A letter
received from him by the superintendent of the institution after he had graduated shows his feelings and
eratitude towards it and its officers : —
Boston, Sept. 22, 1858.

FRIEND

Day:

A feeling of heartfelt gratitude prompts me to address you, and
thank you, as the instrument of God, in leading me, by your Christian kindness, sympathy, and example, from the monster Rum.
Before I came to your Home, life to me was a burden. As a
business man no one had confidence in me. My friends one after
another turned their cold shoulder upon the poor inebriate they
were once glad to see — as a moderate drinker. In short, my social
position in society was gone. I felt it as only the drunkard can feel.
I thought I would drown the feelings by drinking deeper from the
cup of destruction.

O, fatal mistake!

Lower

and lower I fell, till

I was brought to the very verge of despair. I resolved to put an
end to my most unhappy existence, and was about to commit the
act by throwing myself under a locomotive on the railroad track.
As I waited the approach of the engine I thought of my God —I
had not courage to enter his presence. His hand pointed me to the
Washingtonian Home. I became an inmate; and words are inadequate to express myself as I feel towards you and all the officers
and others connected with this institution. I know that nothing
else could have saved me from a drunkard’s grave. Time after time
I have resolved and promised one who is near and dear to me by
the ties of nature, that I would give up the cursed cup that was
leading me to destruction. I was sincere to her. I knew what she
had suffered. I thought I could keep my resolutions — but, alas!

I trusted to my own strength; and time after time I fell, till at last
I felt that I was lost. But after I became an inmate of the Home I
felt that if others had reformed at this institution, I could.

I went

to God, and from him I received aid; and in him I put my trust.

ae

A VOICE

FROM

THE

I now feel that I have something to live for. I find that I have
friends who cheer me with their kind advice and example; and may
they in return be cheered by our Heavenly Father. O, can I forget the very many kindnesses I have received from you, my friend,
and all connected with this society! It is engraved deeply upon my
heart, and can never be erased till I am locked in the cold arms of

death.
My history you know something about. I have held many responsible situations in life ; among which I will mention some of the
most prominent. I was an officer in the United States army; served
in the Mexican war, under General Taylor; have been assistant
postmaster at Booneville; was agent for a manufacturing company
in Connecticut;

have filled several situations

in stores, in different

capacities ;have been master of a vessel,—
and nearly all the time
a moderate drinker.
In 1851 I married Rey. John Wilkinson’s
daughter, of Bath, Me., and for several years have carried on an
auction and commission piano-forte and melodeon business, till I
was burnt out, two years ago last 4th of July. My stock being
much damaged, I was obliged to close up my business, without a
dollar left. Hard times and the fire did me great injury, but rum
killed me in a business view. At intervals, for nearly two years, I
drank deep, — yes, very deep. It ruined my credit, and would have
brought me to a drunkard’s grave, only for the influence thrown
around me by your glorious institution.
I am now thirty-six years of age. From the age of fifteen I have
drank more or less liquor, with the exception of three years. And
when I think of the past, and realize what I might have been only
for the damning vice of intemperance, a feeling of despondency will
steal over

me.

The past, I know, I cannot recall.

But

I am now

a temperate man; and should I never realize the hopes and anticipations of my youth, I can be happy in trying to serve my God,
and encouraging my fellow-men. Hoping that the confidence they
have in my reformation is not misplaced, and feeling determined
to persevere,

I remain yours truly,

b-———.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

173

Mr. B
now stands forth before the world a
redeemed man. He has become a prominent member
of the order of the Sons of Temperance, and holds a
responsible and honorable position in the Massachusetts
Division, No. 71. His family connections reside in the
State of Connecticut, but he has chosen Boston for his
abiding place. He is well known in this vicinity, as he
frequently addresses temperance audiences.
God speed
him in his good work, and preserve him stanch and
strong in the new faith he has embraced !
152

LAie See

174

A VOICE

FROM

CHAPTER

THE

VIII.

‘‘Free am I now, and ne’er again
The viper will I clasp ;
For countless millions it has slain
With its destructive grasp.”

Mr.
, of Elizabeth City, New Jersey, formerly
a merchant in New York, but who had retired upon
a competency, came to the Home on the first day of
April, 1858. He was a man sixty years of age, and
a man of family; he was brought to the institution by
his brother of New York, by the advice of Dr. Murray
of Elizabeth City, and Mr. Marsh of New York. He
was a gentlemanly man, quiet and inoffensive in his
deportment ; but, as was stated in Mr. Marsh’s letter
to the superintendent, he had unfortunately become
addicted to the use of strong drink, and was at times
uncontrollable.
He had been a prominent man in his
city ;was a deacon of the Rev. Dr. Murray’s church,
and his propensity to gratify his appetite was a source
of mortification to his family and friends.
It was
therefore deemed advisable to induce him to come
to the Home for treatment.
In the seclusion and retirement

of his country residence

he was

not aware

of the terrible ravages of intemperance, or what glaring

WASHINGTONIAN

HOMRB.

175

evils and untold distress it had caused in the community. He had, all through his life, been accustomed
to partake of the social glass, and never reflected upon
the terrible growth that seed would eventually produce.
At the Home

the case was different; there he had an

opportunity of witnessing some of the distressing effects caused by rum-drinking; there he was led to
exclaim, “Can it be possible that so much evil and
misery is caused by intemperance?”
He became deeply impressed by what he daily saw transpiring around
him, and was so horror-stricken with the vice of drinking that he publicly renounced the use of it forever,
and earnestly enforced upon others the necessity of
taking and abiding by the same course. The fervency
of his supplications to his heavenly Father to give
him strength to carry out his good resolutions, carried
conviction to the minds of his hearers of his sincerity
of purpose. We have every reason to believe that
this person, during his short residence at the Home,
experienced a complete and thorough reform of his
previous habits, and that he will live and die a firm
and true temperance man. We are still more strongly
induced to believe that such will be the case from letters which have been received from him since his departure from the Home, one of which, written shortly
after he left, we give the reader below.
TRENTON, N. J., May 27, 1858.

ALBERT

Day, Esa.

My dear Friend:

You must not conclude, because I have not

written before this, that I had forgotten you and the many kind

176

A VOICE

FROM

THE

friends I became acquainted with in Boston, for they were so many
and so kind and affectionate that I shall never forget them nor the
institution over which you preside. I try often to remember it in
my prayers to the throne of grace, that the Lord will continue to
bless it, and to raise up to its aid many good and substantial friends,
of which it has a large number already; and I would here say that
I have never in my whole life been so well pleased and felt so happy, among those who were strangers to me, as I was while with you.
I love to think of the fact that scarcely an hour passed through the
day that some one or more of the managers and Christian friends
did not call and salute you with a kind, encouraging word of cordial salutation; and I do not forget our Tuesday evening prayer
and temperance meetings, the interesting addresses and fervent
prayers that were there offered up; may they all be answered, and
may they descend in blessings on the heads of those that offered
them, as well as on the cause for which they were offered. I hope
and pray that the Lord will not only raise up friends to pray for
it, but many that will cheerfully give of their substance towards its
support. I would here say that I learned a lesson which I hope I
shall never forget; and that is this, — that a number who have been

very intemperate for many years, and who have broken off and then
drank again, perhaps worse than ever, and so continued for a number of years, now have come out decided in the temperance cause,
and are now respectable men and good Christian citizens, happy in
their families, among their friends, and are again pursuing a good and
profitable business; so there is hope for me, and I mean and intend,

looking to the Lord for his help and blessing, to live while life lasts
a temperate and, I hope, a Christian life, and perhaps yet see many
pleasant and happy days. Perhaps I may say that I have never
gone to the excess that thousands go; but I will confess that any
departure from the strict temperance rule is wrong, and should be
carefully guarded against and shunned. The different scenes the
inmates had passed through, and their past and present prospects,
never can be effaced from my mind ; and as, like the Prodigal, I had

wandered far away in the forbidden paths of sin, so may I, like him,

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

177

return with true and unfeigned repentance, and be received by my
Maker and Redeemer, and again be happy in my family, and again
be surrounded by kind and pleasant friends. I wish and desire to
be remembered to all my friends there; and as it would be impossible to name them all, I will only mention a few: Mr. Joseph Story,
the president; Wm.

Adams,

Mr.

Thomas

Rowan,

Mr.

Goodhue,

Mr. Beal, and Rey. Mr. Kellogg, the Rev. Dr. Blagden, pastor of
the Old South Church,— where I mostly attended,
— Mr. Terrill,
your assistant, the doctor, Mrs. Day and family, the inmates, and

others whom I cannot call to mind, to them all I would send my
best and warmest affections, and may the Lord be with and bless
them. I got to New York on Tuesday, the 20th day of April, at
about half past five o’clock P. M., and went out to Elizabeth, my

home.
One feature of your institution which I was much pleased with
was, that I was not restrained from going about the city of Boston,
and viewing the different things that are there to attract one’s attention, all which I enjoyed very much. I suppose the noon and evening prayer meetings are numerously attended; I never saw any more
so in all my life. If there are a great many intemperate and wicked
people in Boston, there are a great many real good Christians and
noble-hearted men, who act as salt in preserving and in bringing
down blessings on those who only care about the things of this world,
to the neglect of the more important. things of the soul and eternity.
If, after a while, things should come around all right again, I intend to make you a visit. Nothing would give me more pleasure
than to see and heartily shake hands with a host of the friends which
I found while there. While I was with you, almost every day I saw
some one from New York, our place, or some place near, with whom
I was acquainted — some of them had been my customers. We have
had, during the month of May thus far, a great deal of rain and
damp weather; it is now raining quite hard. It seems very much
against the farmer; but He that sends it always does what is right.
You said perhaps you might visit New York some time within the
year,

You must, without fail, come and see me,

I shall look for an

178

A VOICE

FROM

THE

answer to this letter from you before long. Let us hereafter keep
up alittle correspondence. Tell any of those I call friends I should
like to hear from them. I desire you will remember me in your
prayer meetings on Tuesday and Sunday evenings, that I may be
kept in the way I should go, and prove a blessing and a help to
many who are wandering away in the paths of intemperance and sin.
Perhaps My. Terrill or yourself has written to the Rev. Dr. Murray; you said you would. I hope you have or will, if you think
proper. My kind and affectionate regards to you and family, Mr.
Terrill, and all others with whom I am acquainted.

I remain, my

dear and respected friend, your humble servant.

Mr.
— was sent to the Home by his brother. He
is a man about thirty-two years of age—has been a
sea captain. His father was a well-known inhabitant
of Boston, and one of its wealthiest citizens. When this
gentleman entered the Home he was in an extremely
bad physical and mental condition ; his nervous system
was in a most dangerous and excited state, caused by
exposure and his prolonged excesses in alcoholic stimulants. He had recently arrived from India by the way
of San Francisco, and had completely worn himself
out. Since his stay in the institution, the greatest
change imaginable has taken place in him. He would
scarcely be recognized by his most intimate friends.
Now that he has altered so much for the better, a radical change has taken place in his mind, and he has
earnestly sought by prayer divine aid to strengthen
and sustain him in his new-formed purpose. He has
labored under many unfavorable circumstances and
associations. His friends and relatives are not strict
temperance men, but rather scout the principles of

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

179

total abstinence. He has been educated in a fit school
for drunkenness, and no doubt drained the dregs of the
glasses at his father’s table before he could plainly
articulate that father’s name.
He frankly said that he
had never mingled with temperance men, or had examples of temperance set before him. He has, to all
appearances, become thoroughly reformed; seems to
take a great interest in the temperance cause, and has
spoken at a number of temperance meetings in Boston
and vicinity ; so far he has held out nobly, and we have
every reason to believe he will so continue to do. He
entered the Home, as an inmate, on the 21st day of
July, 1858, and left on the 9th day of November following. One of his letters, written in acknowledgment of
the favors he had received at the hands of the officers of

the institution, we give below : —
FRANKLIN

STREET, August 30, 1858.

My dear Mr. Day: Probably in a few days business will compel
me to leave the Home; and I cannot think of taking my departure
without expressing my gratitude to you for the kindness I have
experienced at your hands.
Indeed this institution has been a home to me;

and the benefits I

have received here are such that they can never be blotted from my
memory. Before I came here, I was a wild, dissipated young man;
but now I can say, by the blessing of Almighty God, and the kind
influences that have surrounded me during my stay with you, I feel
that I am an entirely changed individual; and it is with pride that I
shall go out into the world and proclaim myself a strict temperance
man, and, with the help of God, I will remain so until the day of my

death. I am a poor correspondent, and, consequently, cannot find
words to express one half what my heart feels; but, my dear sir, I

180

A VOICE

FROM

THE

know that not only you, but those good men who have established
the Washingtonian Home, will all meet with your reward; if not in
this world, you will in that world where I think you must certainly
go
— with that Saviour whose holy precepts you are so earnestly striying to carry out, and acting towards the poor fallen inebriate the
part of the good Samaritan.
It is, indeed, a glorious mission on which you have started; and if

you only succeed in saving one out of ten of those who come under
your care for treatment, great must be your reward. In writing this,
my good friend, I feel both sad and happy
— sad at the idea of
parting with the few with whom I have been so intimately connected, and happy when I think what a different man I now am to
what I was some six weeks since, when I first took up my abode >
under the protecting roof of the Washingtonian Home. There are

many others whose hearts will be glad when they hear I have become a temperance man. My wife, my child, my kind friends, who
are fifteen thousand miles away from me, will all join in thanking
God that Iam a reformed man; and now I have made up my mind
so firmly never to indulge in intoxicating drink, I trust I shall have
strength to accomplish another great victory, which to me seems
harder than to leave off drinking. I sincerely desire to be a good
man

and a true Christian;

but, my good friend, I am

doubtful

of

success. I have indeed prayed and prayed. I trust sincerely in
God to change my heart, and to give me that true faith in our
Saviour which we must have to become a child of his; but still I
seem to be no nearer to him than I have been heretofore ; and J am

afraid, should I go to sea again, where there would be no good
influence over me, I might go astray and forget I ever tried to become
a good man. I have many things to contend with
— an irritable temper, or, more properly, a quick one. My natural disposition has
been ruined by myself giving way to my feelings of despondency,
caused by the loss of property—a paltry excuse, you will think.
Still, with every thing against me, I am going to try, and hope

that in God’s own good time I shall accomplish something that will
give me peace and happiness here below, and prepare me for a great

ee

wey

ee

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

181

and glorious eternity which I hope to spend with him who died for
me. Don’t think me prosy, for I assure you I feel just as I have
written; and who would not feel so after seeing the good example
set us by such men as Mr. Story, Capt. Easterbrook, and your good
self? And I trust in time the good seeds which you have sown here
will spring up in my heart, and bring forth fruit a hundred fold.
You have known me now long enough to judge somewhat of my
character ; and I trust that after my departure from the Home, should
any of my friends inquire about me, you will be able to say, “He was
lost and is found, he was dead and is alive again.” I am getting
nervous and can say but little more; my heart is full of gratitude to
you, and all connected with the institution;

and may God bless you

and yours, will not only be my prayer but the prayer of one who is
dearer to me than all the world besides, and although unknown to
you personally, I know she will pray God to bless you for your kindness tome. Once more, God bless you and yours, and believe me,
my dear Mr. Day,
Affectionately yours.

Mr. F
remains yet in Boston, and has, since his
departure from the Home, remained true to his pledge,
and stanch and firm to the principles of temperance
and total abstinence.
In a conversation which the
writer had with him, on Washington Street, a few days
since, he expressed himself as firm in the cause as ever;
and to use a remark of his, which was expressive of his
feelings, he said:
‘I have nailed the temperance
colors to the mast, and there they shall fly as long as
the ship swims.’’ God grant that they may! May they
never be struck to the enemy!
May he never permit
upon his deck the tread of that fiend who brings ruin
and desolation.
Mr. A
came to the Home on the Ist of May,
16

182

|

A VOICE

FROM

THE

1858. He was born in New England; is now about
fifty-seven or fifty-eight years of age, and a widower
with five children. He has formerly been engaged in
the dry goods business; but, having met with reverses,
is now working at his trade, that of a carpenter. At
the time of his admission to the Home he was in the
incipient stages of delirium tremens. His daughter had
called a few days previous to make inquiries in regard
to his being received.
From what she saw there, she
became at once convinced that it was the only place
in which her father could be put to secure his reformation.
At her solicitation the superintendent called
upon her father, and, after much persuasion, succeeded
in overcoming the old gentleman’s objections, and prevailed upon him to accompany him to the Home.
He
was a fine looking gentleman, of mild and amiable
disposition when sober, courteous and affable in his
deportment.
He soon succeeded in securing the good
wishes and feelings of the inmates of the institution.
He had formerly been a man of means, and a liberal
liver ; but, through his attachment to the fatal cup, had
become reduced in circumstances.
He was, to use a
familiar expression of his own, ‘ on his last legs.” He
became an inmate of the Home none too soon. In the
course of a week he was so far restored as to be able to
go out in search of work. He, however, continued to

remain in the institution for about a month; during
which time perhaps no man who ever entered that
asylum for treatment ever experienced a greater change
both morally, mentally, and physically.

He, to use his

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

183

own words, as he frequently at public meetings expresses himself, has found grace in the Lord, and now
relies, not alone upon his own strength to sustain him
in his new resolutions, but leans implicitly upon the
strong arm of his Redeemer, who is willing, and who
has the power, to save.
He is a constant attendant
at the Sunday and Tuesday evening meetings at the
Home, and a zealous and active worker in the temperance cause. He has always, since he left the Home,
stood firm and true to his pledge, and we have every
faith and assurance that he will continue so to do until
his life shall close.
The case of Mr.
is one of peculiar and deep
interest, as he had been for years a person of intemperate habits, and connected for a long while with the
fire department of this city. He is a man between
thirty-three and thirty-four years of age, and has a
family. He came to the Home for treatment in the
month of September, 1858. In the spring of the year
preceding his admission to the institution, a change
of feeling seemed to be taking place in his mind;
he became a regular attendant at religious meetings, and was to all appearances seriously impressed
with religious sentiments. For several months he remained strictly temperate.
He occasionally visited the
meetings at the Home, and spoke in favor of temperance; he also, by his advice and influence, induced
others to come to the institution for the purpose of
being cured of their bad habits. But in an evil hour
he again fell a victim to the tempting destroyer, and

184

A VOICE

FROM

THE

for about a month he continued drinking to excess.
At last he was overtaken by sickness, and confined to
his bed by debility. During his confinement he was
freauently called upon by the superintendent of the
Home, who sought by prayer and entreaty to strengthen
and support him in his great trial. Says the superintendent, “he seemed truly conscience-stricken and
penitent, and kept constantly crying out, ‘1 am lost!
I am lost! I cannot stand! I cannot be saved!’”
At
last he desired that he might be taken to the Home; he
looked upon that course as the only one which was left
whereby he might entertain a hope of reformation.
The superintendent advised him to come; but his wife

had lost all hope.

She was a true Christian woman,

a devoted wife, and fond mother; but continued trials
had worn out her hopes, and she had given up in
despair of ever seeing her husband reformed.
He,
however, did come; he left his place of business, unknown to his friends, and became an inmate of the
Home.
For several days he was seriously indisposed;
but at length abused nature began to react, and his
bodily health was materially improved. He remained
at the institution but a short time, when he left to
renew his business pursuits, yet sufficiently long to
cause the black and leaden clouds that had so long
hung over his darkened way to disperse and scatter,
and let the soothing and sustaining power of grace
shine in upon his troubled soul. The writer has heard

him, in remarks made at public temperance meetings, relate the experience of those few days’ residence

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

185

in the Washingtonian Home.
Said he, “No human
‘being can tell the horrible agony I endured, for a few
days, before I felt that God had given me hope. When
I was at the Home, I was down in No. 2. There I was
alone. I took my Bible, opened it, got down on my
knees, and prayed, —O, how I prayed,—no man can
tell how earnestly. I cried out for help and forgiveness ; and at last, in that lonely room, it seemed as if
relief came.
I began to feel better; I began to get
stronger, as it were, and I determined to go home.
I had been very weak, scarcely able to stand; still I
determined to go. As I passed down across Boston
Common, I trembled from nervous weakness.
I believe that I was only kept up in that walk by the new
hopes that had been raised up in my heart. I felt as
if a new era had opened before me; as if a new life
had dawned upon me; as if I now had something to
live for. And I thank God it was so.’? Continuing,
he says, “ Now I stand before you a truly reformed
man. You can see what the Washingtonian Home has
done forme.
I am now a happy man; thank God for
that. JI never knew what happiness was before I experienced feelings of religion. I thought I was happy
when I was pursuing acourse of wickedness and sin;
but O, how I was deceived! Yet I thank God that he
enlightened me at last; that he took pity upon me, a
poor miserable sinner that I was, and has, in his mercy,
made me what I am.” He is now a stanch and prominent temperance man, and holds the office of chaplain
in the Liberty Tree Division of the Sons of Temperance
1G

186

A VOICE FROM THE

in the city of Boston, and does good and great service
by his example and influence in the temperance cause.
To show our readers how terrible must be the agony
endured by the victim of delirium tremens, and in
order to give some idea of the hallucinations experienced by individuals suffering with that terrible
disease, we give some of the scenes witnessed by Mr.
while he was suffering with that complaint. In
his narrative he says,—
“JT had taken some pills, and I imagined that in attempting to
swallow them, one had passed up in the passage way leading from
the mouth to the nose; it kept troubling me incessantly. ‘Towards
night the top of the bedposts began to assume the shape of human
faces. At first they were not of a very unpleasant form. I tried to
look at a plant that was in the room, but every leaf assumed the appearance of a face which kept constantly changing its form and
expression, each moment growing more terrible and hideous. I
think that during that night and the following day I was sufficiently
sane to know that these visions were but the effects of a diseased
imagination, and so I kept still and said nothing about what I saw.
After that, I seemed to lose all power of self-government ; and for
the next three days I seemed to be passing through some form of
initiation preparatory to being admitted into some kind of secret
society. There was an open stove in the room where I lay, with a fire
in the grate. I sat in front of the fire. I looked in through the
fire, apparently, down into a room below. ‘There I could see a number of my drinking companions, who were all members of the society
into which I was being initiated. In the first place, they made a
pile of bottles about two feet high and seven feet long. They were
laid on the side, and piled up one above the other. I was made to
lie down upon the top of them, and the least motion I made the
botties would roll, and I would sink down towards the centre of the

pile; then the bottles would break and cut me in a terrible manner.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

,

187

There seemed to be a flooring between them and myself, which was
perforated with gimlet holes so close together that I could see
through it as well as if it was a wire netting. They had a large roll
of wire in the room below, which they would start up through the
floor by some kind of hidden machinery that I could not see. It
would pass up the legs of my pantaloons, and wrap around my
body as swift as lightning. It seemed as though it would squeeze me
to death; but, in an instant, it would all pass off, to be in a moment

repeated again. How long this continued I cannot say, for day and
night were as one to me. Next they commenced firing very small
pistols at me; the balls seemed to pass through and through me, yet
did not seem to do me much harm. -The firearms seemed to grow
larger and larger until they appeared as large as a barrel; the balls
they discharged now appeared to be red hot; through and through
my body they passed, rending and tearing my limbs; yet I stood it
all, knowing that the rest of the members had gone through the
same tortures. Every time they commenced a new part of the
ceremony, they would -assure me it was the last. The presiding
officer stepped forward and said, ‘ Now you have to pass the bridge,
and then you are a member.’ He then opened a door, and such a
sight as burst upon my vision, cannot, by any human power, be
described. It appeared to me to be an arched or covered bridge,
about eight feet high, and of the same width, and apparently about

forty feet in length.

Upon it there seemed to be about two feet depth

of molten iron, roaring and throwing off its heat the same as you
would see it in an immense blast furnace. Between the surface of
the melted iron and the top of the arched way the space was filled
with the most hideous serpents, spouting fire and flying around in
every direction. I was ordered to pass over the bridge. I looked
for an instant upon the terrible scene before me, and then, horror-

struck, broke away, dashed by a man who was standing at the door
of my room, up stairs, into a room where a man

and his wife were

in bed, and, with one wild bound, over the bed in which they were

lying, and into a closet on the other side of the room; there I held
the door with the strength of a giant inspired by fear and desperation.

183

A VOICE

FROM

THE

After remaining there a long while I was at last persuaded to come
out, upon being assured by my friends that these terrors of my own
creation had passed away. It would be impossible to describe all
the terrible scenes through which I passed in that endless agony.
“Again the scene changed. I seemed to be out in a terrific
storm, in the streets near the Boylston Market, in Boston.

‘There

appeared to be a stable there. I was very tired,—had no place
to go to,—and being without money, I went into the office of
the stable, where the men slept who were employed in the concern.
I told them of my destitute situation, and begged permission to
remain there until the storm was over. One of the men told me
to get into his bunk. I got in, and in a few moments fell asleep.

Presently the man came back. He found I had gone to bed with
my boots on. He commenced upbraiding me in very harsh language for such conduct, and told me if I wanted to stay there I must
go down and sleep with the hogs. I went down and lay among the
pigs, in a large pen. I had scarcely got there when a man came
down through the stable with a basket full of something on his arm.
He came up to where I was lying and emptied the contents over
me. It was filled with lice. ‘They covered me from head to foot,
and were crawling over and biting every part of my body. The
hogs with which I was lying then began to get uneasy, and commenced rooting around ; presently they began to eat my feet. My
strength failed me, so that I had no power to keep them off. I
thought I could hear them chew the bones in my legs. While the
hogs were eating me the lice all left. They then commenced eating
a hole in the side of my body. Then back again came the man
with a basket filled with centipedes, which he threw over me. They
immediately commenced an attack upon me. They seemed to rush
in a body for the hole the swine had made in my side. They commenced eating towards my heart. TI lay still, without the power of
moving. I felt that I was dying. I had still, however, through all
this, the consciousness that my wife and family were standing around
my bed.
“ At last all these horrible hallucinations passed away, and my

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

189

end seemed to have come. I closed my eyes in death, as I supposed, and as all my friends thought too. But Almighty God, in
his infinite mercy, spared my life, I trust, for some wise and good
purpose. During the one hundred and forty consecutive hours of
raving delirium through which I passed, I did not for one moment
close my eyes in sleep. Every attention and the best medical
attendance was all that saved my life. When I thought my eyes
were closing upon the scenes of this world, never to open again, I
was falling into a deep’ and leaden sleep, from which I was aroused
after a lapse of eighteen hours, entirely exhausted; but in time I
gradually recovered my ordinary health and strength.”

Thomas C
came to the Home in August, 1858.
He was born in England, but has for the last twenty
years resided in Savannah, Georgia. He left the South
for the purpose of eradicating the habit of drinking.
He however commenced his old habits while in the city
of New York. He left a valuable watch in pledge in
that city, upon which he had borrowed a small sum of
money.
In his wanderings he at last reached Boston.
Here he threw himself into the vortex of dissipation, and
soon became so reduced in person and means that he
sold his pocket-knife for a glass of rum. He then went
to the mayor of the city, and begged that he would commit him to some of the public institutions, where he
would be beyond the temptation of the destroyer. He
was about to be committed to Deer Island, when a
bystander recommended him to go to the Washingtonian Home.
He was glad to embrace any chance
whereby he might hope to escape from the terrible
bonds which had bound him down.
He, however, did
not immediately become a member of the institution.

190

A VOICE

FROM

THE

A few days after this application to the mayor, he
one evening, in his wanderings, entered the Mariners’
Chapel. There he related his troubles to the Rey.
Mr. Kellog, who at once interested himself in his case,
and accompanied him to the Home.
At the time of
his admission to the institution he was in an extremely
precarious condition.
Nature had been so outrageously
abused that she could not have held out a great while

longer. His legs were swollen in such a manner that
they presented a frightful appearance.
From the knee
joints to the ankles they were running sores. The day
after his admission he was unable to leave his bed.
The terrible physical condition to which he had reduced himself, together with the curtailing of his
accustomed stimulant, operated upon him in a manner that caused the most intense sufferings. Although
not laboring under the éffects of delirium tremens
fairly seated, yet the incipient stages of that disease
superinduced horrors and terrific visions that harrowed
up his very soul. In a few weeks he was comparatively restored to health. He evinced the warmest
gratitude for the benefits which he had received, and
under the genial and salutary influences of the Home
government firmly resolved to abandon the intoxicating ~ —
cup, which had so nearly wrought his ruin. He is a
mai of about forty-eight years of age, and of good
business qualifications; has been engaged in the lumber business, and held intimate business relations with
some of the first lumber merchants in the city of
Boston. But his devotion to the vice of intemperance

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

191

had blasted his prospects, and cast a eloom over his
life. During his stay at the Washingtonian Home his
mind seemed to have received new impressions, and
the baneful effects of intemperance to have been fully
realized ; and his only and truthful motto was, ‘“‘ Touch
not, taste not, handle not,’’ — which is indeed the only
bulwark of safety behind which can be found shelter.
A communication addressed to the superintendent by
Mr. C
, which we give below, shows the character and attainments of the man, as well as his appreciation of the institution of which he was a member.
Boston, August,

1858.

ALBERT Day, Esq., Superintendent of Washingtonian Home.
Respected Sir: I conceive it to be my. paramount duty to you,
and to the ladies and gentlemen who are the patrons of the Home,
to express my thanks and unfeigned gratitude for the kindness I, a
stranger, have received at your hands, and the almost unparalleled
and unremitting exertions made to reclaim the unfortunate inebriate
that I have witnessed during my stay at the Home. O, what a glorious mission is yours, so nobly adopted and beneficially carried out!
The happy influences with which its inmates are surrounded, the
kindness that we receive, can but be appreciated by the unfortunate,
and call forth all the better feelings of our nature —a lasting gratitude. When I review my past career of intemperance, from my
youth and through the prime of life, and notwithstanding the excellent opportunities that have presented themselves of my being useful
and of attaining wealth and position, and the many and unceasing
prayers of my aged parents and friends that have been continually
offered to Heayen for my reclamation, I can now but exclaim that God
so willed it should be. For upwards of thirty years I have been
drinking fearfully ;and, had I not been blessed with an extraordinary constitution, should have been in a drunkard’s grave. I have

192

A VOICE

FROM

THE

squandered a good inheritance, and lost all my own estate, well nigh
ruined forever my own peace of mind, and that of my family. For
the past three years I have not known what it was to retire to my
bed sober, excepting during a short sickness, at whiclf time I feared
to review the past, and had no hope for the future.
I fortunately recovered from this sickness, but, alas, only to indulge
more and more in the bane of my existence, Alcohol, to which I had

become a slave. All the ennobling impulses of my nature were
corrupted; I was lost to all ties of domestic ‘affection or parental
love. For years I have not corresponded with my beloved and aged
parents or family, notwithstanding their earnest entreaties. My wife
and daughter were sent on to New York for the benefit of their
health. I soon after ceased all correspondence with them; and for
all the information they received from me, I might as well have been
dead. This continued for over two years, until within a few weeks,
having some business in New York and Boston, I visited them.
Despair and remorse had taken possession of me. I had taught
myself to believe that one day’s abstinence would cause my death.
I now rejoice that my business called me to New York and Boston.
When I arrivedinBoston I commenced drinking to a terrible extent.
I had made away with my watch, the gift and long-treasured memento of my dear father, and also with about forty-five dollars, in a
few days, and all for a poison that was ruining me.
In a wretched and pitiable state of mind, I attended one of the
churches in this city. After the service, the minister came up and
entered into a conversation with me. He advised me to come to the
Washingtonian Home, and went there with me; there I was kindly
received. I, however, left under the pretence of going for my
clothing, and continued drinking the rest of that day. On the following Monday morning, with nothing but despair before me, I went
to the mayor of the city of Boston, showed him testimonials of my
integrity from gentlemen standing high and occupying prominent
official positions, and begged of him that I might be placed under
restraint for a few days, feeling a conviction that if I could be kept
away from liquor for a few days that I would leave off the habit for-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

193

ever. His honor kindly offered to send,me to Deer Island, which I
have since found to be a place for the correction of vagabonds. I
had through life maintained an unsullied, generous reputation,
excepting only my unhappy propensity for drink. However, I accompanied the mayor to an office adjoining the City Hall, where a
gentleman, who was there and heard my case, suggested that the
Washingtonian Home was the proper place for me. I accordingly
again went to the Home, was again received, and, after two weeks
of the most intense suffering, I was relieved both in body and mind ;
I once more became myself again by means of the kind and unremitted attention bestowed upon me; the whispered words of hope,
the sympathy extended, and the fact that even strangers cared for
me, buoyed up my drooping spirits, and infused new life and hope
in one who had been cast down, every virtue prostrated, and all feelings of love and affection alienated from their natural course. I can
now exclaim, Truly am I not a brand plucked from the burning! O,
sir, how many I have known in various parts of the Union who have
passed away into a drunkard’s grave, who, if they had the same
philanthropic influences brought to bear on them, would have been
alive to-day — blessings to themselves and to their families, and ornamentsto society. O, sir, I pray that you, and all connected with the
Home, will continue to press on in your labors of love; and be not
weary in well doing, for most assuredly, in due time, shall you meet
with your reward.
I cannot help thinking if our legislature and the municipal authorities throughout our Union were to be informed as to the management and results of the Washingtonian Home in Boston, they
would adopt this as a model institution in preference to all the Deer
Islands or houses of correction throughout the United States, which
are maintained throughout the republic at such a vast expense and
with such insignificant reformatory results. Although a long life
cannot atone for my past errors and the anguish I have caused
those who are bound to me by ties of consanguinity, I am strong in
the determination that they shali never occur again from the same
cause; and I now beg leave to renew my assurance to keep the

17

194

A VOICE FROM THE

pledge inviolate the rest of my life. Please receive my unbounded
thanks and gratitude for your kindness, and believe me,
Yours respectfully.

The superintendent informs the writer that he recently heard from Mr. C
, Who is at present in the
city of New York, and he is doing nobly in the temperance cause.
ven at this moment a gentleman called
upon the writer, and in the course of conversation, informed him that he knew Mr. C
well; that he visited him at his house in Second Street, in the city of
New York, on the Sunday evening preceding ; that he
was all right, and stanch and true as ever; a firm soldier in the temperance army, thanks to the Washingtonian Home of Boston and its good workings.
Mr. U:
was born in Massachusetts, and, previous to coming to the Home, resided in Cambridgeport. He was a clerk by occupation, and also acted
as a Boston correspondent for several of the coun-

try papers, published in Massachusetts.
He was a
widower of about fifty years of age, with two children. For two or three years previous to his admission to the Washingtonian Home he had been in
the habit of drinking to excess. When he was admitted
as an inmate, he was in a most deplorable condition.
Being a stout, fleshy man, of strong, sanguine temperament, there was danger to be apprehended of fits.
He escaped delirium tremens, but suffered most excruciatingly for a few days. As he began to recover he

realized the peril in which his evil habits had placed

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

195

him, and thanked God for his safe deliverance.
From
day to day, influenced as he was by the associations
with which he was surrounded, he began to see the
folly and sin of pursuing a course of inebriety and intemperance, and finally resolved to abandon forever the
almost, to him, fatal and destroying cup.
This individual was a man of good education and address, and while an inmate of the Home conducted
himself in the most urbane and gentlemanly manner ;
aiding the superintendent materially in the prosecution
of his multitudinous and arduous duties. He left the
Washingtonian Home in September, and soon after
joined the order of the Sons of Temperance, and remained a stanch and true son of that organization up
to the day of his death, influencing many by his example and precept.
He died on the 26th of January,
1860, at East Corinth, in the State of Maine, while
travelling as an agent for Redding & Co., of Boston,
of Russia Salve notoriety. The writer was informed by

Col. D

, who

accompanied

the

remains

of Mr.

U
to Boston, that never before, in his extensive
travelling experience, had he found an instance where
in so short a time had an individual gathered around
him such a large circle of warm friends as had the
deceased. An article upon the Washingtonian Home,
showing some of the workings and results, prepared by
the deceased for publication, but which was never given
to the press, we now give below, in order that our readers may judge of the attainments of some of the individuals reformed at the Home.

196

A VOICE

FROM

THE

‘‘ About two years since a few gentlemen who never had the misfortune to need a home of this kind, and who are happy in their own,
conceived the idea of establishing a Home for the reformation of inebriates. At the start it met with very many obstacles. The greatest
difficulty to overcome was to find a man fully competent for a superintendent; money would not obtain a suitable one. Its success demanded a man who had a heart in the work. Among those who
took part in the enterprise was its present superintendent, Albert
Day, Esq., who had made his glory for years the relief of this unfortunate class, and what was the most remarkable he never partook
of a glass of any intoxicating drink. Yet he watched the fatal
results upon others, and saw the wretchedness and misery which was
brought upon them and their families. Conversant as he was with
the wants of those that wished to reform, he reluctantly consented to
leave a lucrative business and take charge of the Home, provided
he was permitted to carry out his own policy in the matter.
“Had this Home been richly endowed, and every accommodation
furnished for his family, the sacrifice might have been less; but lim-

ited in its means and accommodations, nothing but a sense of duty
could induce such a man to accept such a position. During its brief
existence, upwards of five hundred patients have graduated from
this institution, temperate men, ¢apable of resuming their business
in their many respectable callings. True it is that some of them
went back again to wallow in the mire from whence they ‘were taken.
Yet the institution is no longer an experiment, but a decided success.
The average of those that have not thus fallen is four in five. More
favorable results could not otherwise be expected; all men are not
gifted with a strength of mind sufficient to resist the many tempta-"
tions which beset them on every hand, and when invited to drink
by their former associates, instead of positively declining, ‘don’t
care if they take a little lemonade.’ Men of such minds bring disrepute on this great enterprise — the reformation of the drunkard.
“ Heretofore the attack of temperance men and temperance adyocates has been against the rumseller, not forgetting to harass with
harsh and unkind words those who were in the habit of partaking

hing.

“a

WASHINGTONIAN

HOMER.

197

of that ruinous draught—rum. It did not ever occur to such minds
that drinking rum was a disease, and could be cured; it .might
have done so to the minds of some temperance lecturers of long experience, but if so, they would not harbor the thought as their most
brilliant perorations were composed, and appropriate only for an
attack upon the rumseller; and then again they would scorn to take
care of the ‘enemy’s wounded,’ as the drunkard is oftentimes
called. False impression prevails to a great extent as to the character of the Home and its inmates. Even visitors are somewhat
curious to see what does not exist, and in the absence of any bolts
and bars make the interrogation, ‘Where do you keep them ?’
doubtless expecting to see the inmates enclosed in a cage like wild
animals in a menagerie. But to the stranger as well as to their
guests this Home is as quiet as any well-appointed hotel. No restraint whatever is placed upon the inmates, but they are free to go
when and where they please; and to those who have no money it
is furnished to them —thus giving them ample chance to procure a
drink if they like; but it is very rarely that one breaks his parole
of honor. The Home is not a receptacle of drunkards, in the general acceptation of the term, as its doors are only open to those that
have a fixed determination to reform; and it is not a place of resort
for those who only want to get over a drunk. Many who might avail
themselves of the benefits of this Home, have too much pride to acknowledge themselves drunkards. A man that drinks any thing,
however, is what he is; it is only a hallucination when they think

none but themselves see the effects which rum is working upon them.
As yet no scale has been invented which has not the approbation of
them that drink. All think that they drink less than their associates, and some go so far as to actually caution others in relation to
their drinking, when they themselves are far more advanced than the
recipients of their caution. It matters not whether a man drinks
once or twenty times a day, both are alike drunkards; yet the man
who takes only one drink per diem scorns the thought that it is engendering an appetite which will soon become his master, and over
which he can have no control. The outward effects of repeated

LYflee

198

A VOICE FROM THE

debauches do not operate on all alike to the public eye, yet the result
is the same—a gradual breaking up of the constitution.
“Public religious services are held morning and evening, on Sundays also, and public meetings every Tuesday evening, which are
freely attended by former graduates of this institution, and the public generally. Increased accommodations are very much needed, and
it is In contemplation to erect a spacious house, which can only be
done by the aid and assistance of its friends throughout the State.
Drunkenness is here treated as a disease, yet sympathy and kindness is the great element which has restored so many. It is a
noticeable fact that those who drink have implanted within them noble
and generous hearts, and feel their own degradation far more than
their friends do for them; and one kind word thus spoken finds its
way readily to the heart: the influence of those that have reformed
there are brought to bear favorably upon their minds, and the time
given to reflection, without the false stimulant of rum, brings a man

to his manhood.
“Those that have graduated from this institution have represented
all classes. Among them are men that are brilliant ornaments of
their profession, men that have enchained vast multitudes by their
eloquence, as well as those connected with almost every branch of
mechanism. The opinion prevails, and to some extent is true, that
drunkards are nobody. Yet they have feelings that should be respected; and instead of treating them with disdain and scorn, show
them that you have sympathy for their misfortunes, and do not
console them with selections from Scripture, such as ‘No drunkard
shall enter the kingdom of heaven,’ and others of like import; but
rather console them with the Bible of this Home, which is kindness,
and which says, Let not him that drinketh not despise him that
drinketh, but rather let God, who knows their many trials and temp-

tations, be their judge.”

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

CHAPTER

IX.

199

‘¢Q, dash down the cup, for it treason contains
Against all ennobling thought;
Renounce it forever; for while it remains,
Virtue’s battle is still to be fought.
The wicked shall never demolish the tower
Which reason hath built for the wise ;

Then haste to the warfare, let knowledge be power;
The earth echoes Humanity’s cries.”

Mr.
was brought to the Home on the 3d day of
September, 1858, in a most forlorn and miserable condition.
He had, with his family, been residing in
Springfield, Mass., where he had left them in an
entirely destitute state. At the time of his admission
he was much intoxicated, his physical health much
impaired, and his constitution broken down. By doing
small jobs that turned up he had managed to procure means sufficient to keep up his drinking habits to
the time of his admission to the Home; he had been a
hard drinker all his life, with the exception of a few
years ; he is a man of good business capacity, was once
in independent circumstances ; but the great Leveller
levelled him, scattered his pecuniary means to the
winds, and left his family destitute and unprotected.
After his admission to the Home, he for a few days suf-

200

A VOICE

FROM

THE

fered severely from the loss of the abominable alcoholic
stimulant that was ultimately devouring, yet temporarily
bracing up and invigorating, his system. After a few
weeks’ residence in the institution he procured some
trifling employment by which he procured means to

bring his family into Boston. His wife and family were
everjoyed at his reformation.
He has five interesting
children, who are just growing up. Who can tell the
joy and pride they must feel at the great revolution
which has taken place in the head and father of the
family! To a question put to him by the superintendent — ‘‘ How was it possible that you could neglect such
beautiful and loving children ?’’ —his reply was, that
the very thought of his family would sink him deeper
and deeper in misery and despair, and drive him to still
further excess, that he might drown in forgetfulness the
unhappy recollection of the degradation and want his
wicked and sinful course had brought upon them. He
is a man of good and kind disposition, and possessed of .
many good qualities; but the damning influence of the
fiend of intemperance had hardened and made callous
the heart of the man, and, in wanton

recklessness, he

seemed to rush deeper and deeper into the mire of
abomination, which must soon have overwhelmed and
destroyed him forever. He is of excellent family connection, being a nephew of ex-President Pierce of New
Hampshire.
We believe Mr.
to be a thoroughly
reformed man.
It is now about sixteen months since
he left the Home, and during that time he has been
firm and true to his pledge, and by his active exertions

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

201

and influence has saved many from the besetting sin.
Below we give a communication from Mr.
» addressed to the superintendent of the Washingtonian
Home, showing his feelings of gratitude towards that
institution.
Since writing the above, the compiler has had handed
him the following statement by the gentleman himself,
desiring that the same may be attached to the preceding brief sketch of his case, —
* In 1839 I lived in Boston; I drank hard, got into difficulty, and
left B. ;went to Rochester, N. Y.; got business

there, and did well

for six months; drinking all the time, but moderately. At last I
got on a spree, lost my situation, and became poor and miserable.
I ran a canal boat, and kept drinking more and more. After living so
for four years, I went to Albany; there I met a friend from Boston,

who assisted me with money to commence business. I commenced ;
every thing I undertook prospered. I continued to prosper for ten
years. I had many friends whom I could call upon for money at
any time, especially Dr. W. R. Ford, who continued to assist me until
the last. Iwas drinking all this time, moderately part of the time ;
but it grew upon me, and at last I became so bad my friends lost all
confidence, and would assist me no longer. I had made many promises to leave off, but could not. At last I was compelled to leave A.,
after living there two years in extreme poverty and misery. I went
to Greenfield in 1855.
I lived there about one year miserably.
From there I went to Springfield, lived there two years, drinking
hard all the time, suffering all that man can suffer from poverty.
In 1858 I left my family entirely destitute, and came to Boston,
still drinking hard; met a friend, who advised me to go to the
Home.
I went there in the month of September, 1858.
From
that time I have abstained from drinking any thing intoxicating,
and have never had a desire to drink from that time to the present.”

202

ALBERT Day, Esa.

A VOICE

FROM

THE
Boston, Sept. 13, 1858.

Dear Friend and Brother, (for so I must call you:) I take this
opportunity of addressing a few lines to you at this time, and shall
attempt in part to express my gratitude to you and your family for
your attention to me in sickness and health while at the Home, for
it has truly been a Home to me; and, could I express on paper what
I feel in my heart towards you, I think, and in fact I know, you
would say that is sufficient. And God grant that you may live a
long life of usefulness, and be an instrument under God in lifting
many a poor unfortunate being like myself from the gutter, and at
last receive a crown of glory at God’s right hand, is the prayer of
your poor, unworthy servant.

Mr.
resides in one of the seaport cities of New
England, noted for its extensive whale fisheries. He is
a mechanic of about forty years of age, and has a
family. He came to the Home in the month of January,
accompanied by several of his friends. He had for
some time previous to his admission been addicted to
gross habits of intemperance, by which means he had
reduced his circumstances pecuniarily, and prostrated
his physical energies to a fearful degree. He had, by

his depraved course, alienated the good feelings of his
friends and worn out the patience of his family. A
short time after his admission, it became apparent that
he would have to pass through the terrible ordeal of delirium tremens ; this horrible disease became developed
in about forty-eight hours after his admission.

‘* Searce-

ly ever,” said the superintendent, ‘have I seen a more
violent case of this terrible disorder, or one where the

unhappy victim suffered more excruciating agony than

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

203

did this unfortunate man during his paroxysms of delirium and wild unnatural frenzy.
At one time he saw suspended over his head, like
the sword of Damocles, an immense bowie-knife, that
seemed every instant ready to fall and pierce him to the
heart. Large beads of perspiration stood out upon
his horror-stricken brow; terrifically he struggled to
escape from the impending danger, but he was finally
bound to his couch to prevent his doing injury to
himself. Again he imagined that an open grave yawned
beside his bed, in which he was to be buried alive; he
imagined that tall black figures stood around it in the
sombre garb of mourners, who were waiting to see the
rites of burial performed. His agony was appalling to
behold ; he writhed upon his couch in torment, and, in
his wild delirium, screamed and yelled for aid, until his
voice was lost, for the time being, in a hoarse whisper.
But, at last, providentially for him, the disease yielded
to medical treatment, and he slowly began to recover;
and he then fully realized the abyss from which he had
escaped. He remained an inmate of the institution
for about a month, when he left for his home.
Since
his departure from the institution he has remained
stanch and true to the new resolutions which he had
adopted. It is now one year since he left, and if,
during that time, he has led an upright life of temperance and sobriety, there is every reason to expect
that he will continue to do so in the future. A communication from Mr.
to the superintendent of the
Washingtonian Home after he had left we have given

204

A VOICE

FROM

THE

in course, as well as a certificate of acknowledgment
of kind treatment from the Star-in-the-East Lodge of
Free Masons towards one of their brothers, which was
received from the members of that Lodge by Mr. Day,
and his reply thereto.
To Mr. ALBERT

NEw

Day.

BEDFORD,

Feb. 14, 1859.

Dear Sir: To make my word good, I embrace the first opportunity
to write you a few lines to let you know of my safe arrival to my
dear native home without accident and clear of whiskey. I found
my family all well and delighted to see me, as you would have
thought if you had been here to witness my reception by mother
and sister, nieces and nephews, to say nothing of my wife and
children. My cheeks were almost blistered, and my arms quite lame
from the kisses and shaking of hands that I got. Before nine o’clock
that night the news got spread abroad that I had arrived; the consequence was continual ringing of my door-bell the whole evening
by friends, who were full of congratulations. The general expression
was, “ Why, how much

better you look!”

‘ Why, what have you

been doing?” I finally had to tell them that they must come and
see you, for it was all your work; so you must not be surprised if
you are overrun with both men and women from New Bedford to
get renovated. There is a gentleman in the office now asking me

what you have been doing to me to make me look so well; he thinks
he will have to come down and see what you can do for him. I tell
him it takes you to do it, and he had better start. I find we are to
have a county temperance convention here to-day, at which Dr.
Jewett, Wm.

Adams, Jr., and a Mr. Parker, who, it is said, is a

graduate of the Washingtonian Home, in Boston, and who, it is
said, is a very eloquent speaker, are to be present. As I had never
heard of such a man while there, of course I could not answer

questions concerning him.

any

Mr. Adams, I suppose, is one of us; if

so I shall find out by him who the said Parker is; I shall go this
afternoon, and shall be able to report on Thursday next.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

205

Give my regards to your family. All my folks join in concert in
wishing to be remembered to you and all your family, and hope to
see you personally at our place ere long. This from
Your humble servant.
The Free Masons in the Star in the East Lodge, in New Bedford,
desire hereby to acknowledge the kindness, as well as the important
aid, of Mr. Albert Day, Superintendent of the Washingtonian Home,
in Boston, in the restoration of “one friend who had wandered
from Jerusalem to Jericho,’ and was in need of the efficient exer-

cise of the “ Good Samaritan ” characteristics which so happily qualiify Mr. Day for the highest degree of usefulness to the fallen,
and thereby through them promoting the best interests of all the
good social relations of human society.
Appreciating this association of the Washingtonian Home, so
well adapted to develop and demonstrate the practical virtues of
Christianity, we commend it to the favorable consideration of all
interested in the welfare of humanity.
Lucius H. MERRILL,

Sec. Star in the East Lodge, New Bedford.
February 7, 1859.
WASHINGTONIAN Home, No. 36 CHARLES STREET,
Boston, Feb. 18, 1859.

To the Officers and Members

of Star in the East Lodge of Free

Masons, New Bedford, Mass.

Gentlemen: I hardly know how to reply to the very flattering
expression of feeling and sympathy in the communication transmitted to me through the hands of our mutual friend and brother,
Henry Taber, Esq.
I feel honored in being permitted to labor in concert with you for
the purpose of restoring to society our fellow-men. I have always
entertained the highest esteem and respect for the noble and ancient
order of which you are a branch.
Many noble and humane acts have come under my own observa-

18

206

A VOICE

FROM

THE

tion which have been done by lodges of your order; and I have
had occasion to bless God that in this wicked and degenerate world
such an order, with such high and noble aims, existed.

I have not

only had occasion to feel this towards you as a body, but for the
many personal friends which I have found belonging to this order,
although my heart is saddened with the recollection that our first
mutual

effort to save a fallen one was not successful, not for his

fault nor ours, but for the interposition of Him who doeth all things
well; and, no doubt, could we know

the design of our

heavenly

Father in taking one from our midst whom we loved, we should all
exclaim, with one united voice, “ Jt is well.”

But again we are permitted to rejoice that one is saved from the
power of the fell destroyer, and, in the language of Scripture say,
“Tt was meet that we should make merry and be glad, for this thy
brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found.”

I can truly say that there is happiness in mourning with those who
mourn, and weeping with those who weep.
You will please accept my thanks for your kindly expressions to me
personally, and also of the association which I represent; and let
me say to those gentlemen, members of your order, with whom I
have but a short personal acquaintance, that I shall cherish them
in my memory, for their names are written on the tablet of my heart
with a pen of iron and the point of a diamond.
Again, gentlemen, let me say that I shall ever be ready to codperate with you in your labors of love and humanity in saving that
which was lost.
Yours affectionately,

ALBERT Day,
Superintendent of Washingtonian Home.

Mr.

was born in the State of Massachusetts.

At the time of his last admission to the Home he resided in Roxbury. He had been an inmate of the
institution previously, and had been carried throughthe delirium tremens by the superintendent; but had,

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

207

notwithstanding all this, again fallen, and subjected
himself to another attack of that fearful disease, which
is ten times worse than death.
At the time of his second admission he was in the incipient stages of delirium tremens. For four days his
life hung suspended by a thread; it seemed as if a
feather would almost turn the scale, vitality so trembled
in the balance. The writer has often heard him relate the horrors which he endured during those four
days. Horrid animals, of unnatural and terrific appearance, surrounded his couch, while flying dragons, vomiting fire and flame, rushed shrieking and howling
through the sultry and oppressive air.
At one time a putrid and festering corpse lay beside
him upon the pillow. The odor of the decaying body
was horrid and sickening ; yet he could not escape from
the horrible apparition. Again the scene would change
—a most beautiful and bewitching girl advanced towards him, holding in her hand a crystal goblet of
sparkling wine. She stretched forth her beautifully
moulded and snowy arm towards him, presenting the
glass for him to drink.
JBurning with thirst, he
stretched forth his hand to grasp the prize, when she
glided backward, smiling encouragement, and beckon-

ing him on. Unable to restrain his actions, he followed on. They passed through beautiful groves, musical with birds of gay plumage, where magnificent
fountains cooled and perfumed the air; still the enchantress retreated.
;
In the distance appeared a splendid ball room, where

208

A VOICE

FROM

THE

hundreds of the most beautiful girls were sporting
to strains of the sweetest and most delightful music.
Still the siren moved on; her supernatural beauty held
his soul enchained.

~He hesitated to advance;

but at

one of her conquering smiles his unwilling feet moved
on. Already she seemed to hesitate and waver, as if
struggling to overcome her modesty and permit his
embrace. With one wild bound he sprang forward to
fold her in his arms.
Then, O, horror, what a change!
Her beauteous form had vanished, and in her stead he
was in the iron grasp of a devil, whose hot and fiery
breath seemed to scorch the very blood in his veins.
‘¢ Drink,” the fiend shrieked, ‘drink the heart’s blood

of your mother ;” and, with his red-hot iron fingers,
he pried open his unhappy victim’s jaws, and poured
the boiling and seething blood down his swollen and
parched throat. O, how he shrieked in torment, and
struggled in vain to escape from the vice-like grasp of
his relentlesss foe! but the fiend held him fast, and
exultingly shouted in his ear, “ You are mine
— you
are mine; body, soul, and all, you are mine.” Then,
clutching him firmly in his embrace, he sprang away
upon an unknown journey. They seemed to rise up
through the roof away towards the sky, until the earth
appeared like a small star beneath them; yet on they
sped. So swift was their motion that he strangled for
want of breath. On they went, until the stars were
passed and lay far beneath their feet. All around was

pitchy darkness, while the air was hot and sultry like
the breath of some vast furnace. At last his tormentor

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

209

roared out, “ Your journey is almost ended; your hour
has come.
Give me your heart, and then go down to
hell, where they are waiting for your company.” With
that he dashed his long and piercing talons deep in his
side, tore out his palpitating heart; then cast him from
him. Down, down he fell through space, surrounded
by that inky darkness, until all consciousness was gone.
When his senses returned he was lying on his bed, surrounded by his kind attendants, exhausted and weak as
a new-born child; but with careful nursing he was restored to health and strength. He is now a member of
the Sons of Temperance, and holds a prominent official
position in one of the divisions of that body ; he has,
since he left the Home, now about six months, remained true to the standard of temperance reform;
and from the active exertion he takes in the cause, we
have every reason to hope he will so remain.
Dr.
is a resident of one of the South-western
States, where he had lived since his earliest boyhood.
Kducated for the medical profession, he at an extremely
early age took a prominent position in the front ranks
of his profession. At one time he held a professorship
in one of the medical colleges in his section of the
country. This position he held for a short time, when
he resigned his professorship to resume his practice,
which soon became extensive and profitable. At quite
an early age he became connected in marriage with an
amiable and interesting daughter of one of the judges
of his native State. About six years previous to his
admission into the Washingtonian Home he began to
18*

Ae AUS)

A VOICE

FROM

THE

indulge in alcoholic stimulant; he was at that time,
he says, worth forty thousand dollars. In a short time
the habit became so firmly fixed upon him that he at
times lost all control over his actions; and he at last

became so infatuated with drink, and so completely
under the influence and power of the demon, that his
friends concluded to confine him in a lunatic asylum,
which they accordingly did. This course, however, did
not effect a cure, as it rarely or ever will. He returned
home from his place of imprisonment, and resumed his
old practices to a still greater extent. His conduct
at last became such that his wife and family of eight
children were compelled to leave him and return to the
home of her father. Being left alone to his wickedness
and debauchery the memories of his old friends and
associations became unbearable.
He then left, and
sought solitude and seclusion in the mountain wilds
of his native State. There he remained for quite a
period, indulging in the vilest excesses. At last he returned to his former place of residence, and lived among
his old friends and associates, who had, during his
voluntary exile, heard of the Washingtonian Home,
in Boston, and who at last prevailed upon him to place
himself under the treatment of that institution as a
last resort. He arrived in Boston on the eleventh
day of April, sick and worn out, and accompanied by
one of his friends from his distant home. It was with
the greatest difficulty that he was brought to Boston
alive ; and his physical pains and distresses were so
ereat that he was only prevented by force from casting

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

.

911

himself from the cars and destroying himself. After
his admission to the Home, he suffered extreme agony
for several weeks; his principal difficulty, which he
understood and scientifically explained himself, was a
disarrangement of the intestines, caused by excessive
indulgence in alcoholic stimulant ; although that stimulant, if indulged in, would have afforded the sufferer
relief, yet he steadily and firmly refused to take it,
even medicinally. In his own language, he says, “I
came to the Washingtonian Home to be cured of my
habits of drunkenness, and, so help me God, I will, or
die in the attempt.” The superintendent, in commenting upon the character of this gentleman in his official
record says, that “he is a man of brilliant talent, of
generous and fine feelings, kind and urbane to all, and
deeply grateful and appreciative of any act of kindness
extended to him.” ‘This gentleman has written many
excellent communications in relation to the Home,
some of which appear in the preceding pages of this
work. “ He has,” says the superintendent, “ during
his stay of five months at this institution, been suffering with sickness for most of the time; but when his
health would permit, was ready and willing, night and
day, to aid and assist me in the discharge and perform-

ance of my duties.’?

He left in the month of Sep-

tember to return to his family and friends, a thoroughly °
regenerated and reformed man. He still keeps up a
correspondence with the officers and superintendent of
the institution of which he was a member, and is a
stanch and true temperance man to the back-bone.
A

949)

A VOICE FROM

THE

communication received from him immediately after his
return home shows the deep feeling he entertains towards the institution which effected his reform, and the
impression which his changed appearance had upon the
minds of his friends, upon his reappearance among
them after his residence of five months in the Washingtonian Home in Boston.
October 21, 1859.

My DEAR Mr. Day:
I commenced writing to you this morning, in very great haste; but
as I am to be absent for a week, I felt that it was wrong to put it
off. I reached
yesterday, one week. I came into town about
9 o’clock at night, and during the next day kept myself housed,
being, as you may believe, as fully wearied as coach travel for several
days and nights could make one so unaccustomed as I have been to
it for several months past. On Saturday I went down to Gay Street,

—the street which is to this place what Washington Street is to
Boston, — and your heart would have been gladdened had you witnessed the enactments of that day. On the corner of the square
& Co., was a constant crowd, renewed as
facing the store of
fast as one left by another filling his place, and which was composed
of persons anxious to shake hands with me. I can assure you that
no politician, on returning to his constituents, could have been
made to feel more the elevation of success, and the pride of station,

than I have been compelled to feel since my advent on Saturday;
and yet Iam constantly made to express in my heart, if my mouth
does not give utterance to it, “And this is sobriety from a reform
at the Washingtonian Home.” No, my dear sir, if ever again any
of your patients intimate,
and there may be some who have
occasion to be ashamed of their residence with you, — tell them of the
pride of one in a distant State; how favors clustered around him,

and honors were strewn before him immediately upon his return from
the Washingtonian Home; and how, before he had time to exhibit

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

213

any of the good results of the working. of that institution, except
from his own personal appearance, he was honored, not from any
personal merit in himself, but because he was from the Home, a
reformed and sober man. If any inmate feels the flush of shame,
my case illustrates, and demonstrates, one of two facts, — the people
amongst whom he has cast his lot are singularly destitute of proper
appreciation, or he himself is unworthy of the influences exerted by
the Home. I wish all the inmates and visitors to know the nature
of my testimony. I feel proud in publishing to the world my appreciation of the Home, and feel honored in being a graduate from

an institution which has done and is daily doing so much good.
Give my kind regards to all your family, and receive for yourself a
fraternal embrace.

The gentleman, whose history we have alluded to, is
now connected with one of the leading journals in the
distant South-west, loved and respected by all who
know him, and a firm and undaunted soldier in the
foremost ranks of the army of temperance.
Mr.
came to the Home in the latter part of the
summer of 1859; he is from a distant State, a man
about thirty-eight years of age, and a gentleman by
birth, education, and character; inheriting wealth he
was educated to no profession or business, but has
through life followed the dictates of a wayward fancy.
The manner in which he was brought up, and his subsequent mode of living, wreathed around him the fatal
bands of intemperance. In daily contact with the destroyer, both at his own table and at the festive board
of his friends, the habit insensibly grew upon him, until
at last the fickle goddess of the wine held him fast in
her embrace. He has been a man of iron constitution,

214

A VOICE

FROM

THE

and has, in a great measure, preserved it unimpaired
by his free participation in the sports of the field, and
his constant habit of violent and severe out-door exercise.

He has travelled much, having crossed the Atlan-

tic several times, and visited the principal cities of the
European continent.
About three years since he made
a voyage to China, and on his return stopped at San
Francisco, from thence to New York, via Panama and
the Isthmus.
He has spent much of his time in the
cities of New Orleans and Washington, two hot beds
of iniquity, and model schools of dissipation. Possessed of a generous disposition and vivacious character, he was a man who would easily fall beneath
the fascinations of the hollow-hearted enchantress;
but at last his better judgment warned him that his
course was wrong, and he firmly wished that he could
break from the chains of his false enslaver ere it was
too late. For that purpose he came to the Washingtonian Home, not as a degraded and debauched drunkard cast off by his friends, and roaming up and down
the land destitute, and having no fixed habitation in
it, but as a man whose better judgment taught him
that his course, if pursued, must end in destruction.
During the winter of 1859-60, while he was an
inmate of the Home, as well as the compiler of this
work, they occupied the same apartments in the institution, and the memories of the writer will in the future
often turn back with pleasure to the pleasant hours they

have passed together beneath the roof of the Alma
Mater where they were both students, learning the

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

215

great lesson of temperance reform.
They are both
soon to graduate with honors— he, to return to the
quiet enjoyment of his ancestral estates, a reformed
man, and the writer, to pursue his professional labors.
May the many and varied scenes which they have witnessed at the Home leave an impression upon their
minds which shall cause them to live and die true
and firm temperance men.
‘The writer at least, speaking for himself, will always look back to that Home
as does the tempest-tossed mariner to the friendly light
that has guided him clear of the rocks and shoals which
threatened his destruction.
Mr.
came to the Home in the month of September, 1858. He is a person of about forty years of
age, an artist by profession, and a man of much talent;
but it has unfortunately been clouded by the evil habit
of indulgence in strong drink. He is a native of Boston, but has for a number of years been absent from
his native city in different places in the State of New
York.
Some of his works of art adorn the galleries
of our merchant princes, and are much appreciated
for their real merit.
Some of the creations of his
pencil were on exhibition in the Boston Atheneum
in the winter of 1859-60, and were highly spoken
of. But the habits of evil, contracted by associating
with his brother artists, were growing upon him, and
daily and hourly insensibly increasing in their fatal
and destructive power. At last, at the urgent solicitation of his wife and friends, he was induced to become

an inmate of the Washingtonian Home.

At the time

740

A VOICE

FROM

THE

of his admission he was considerably under the influence of liquor, but no very serious results were experienced from his past debauchery, as far as delirium
was

concerned.

After a few

weeks

residence

in the

institution, Nature began to assert her rights. Numerous pictures— children of his labor—have from time
to time appeared on exhibition upon the walls of the
Home, and, being disposed of, have made way for
others. Mr.
continued to reside in the institution for about three months, visiting his home where
his family resided daily, and without any interruption
following his professional studies. Although for a number of years addicted to habits of intemperance, and
having keenly felt its injurious effects upon him, he
felt when he left the Home as if a new light had
dawned, and that, with the assistance of God, he would
for the rest of his days, for his own and for his family’s
sake, lead a life in accordance with the doctrine and
principle taught him at the Washingtonian Home.
God help him in that resolution, is the wish of his
biographer.
Mr.
was born in the State of New York, and
has for some time past resided in the State of Maine.
He is a man of about fifty years of age, and by profession a Universalist minister. He came to the Home
in September, 1859, in a very destitute and deplorable
condition.
He had been preaching in the central
part of the State of New York, and being. afflicted
with severe neuralgia, and becoming low-spirited, had
commenced taking wine as a stimulant to drive away

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

Bf Sj

melancholy. The habit soon grew upon him to such
an extent that he was compelled to resign his ministry
and become a wanderer in his peregrinations. He at
last reached Boston, and continued roaming about
until he was discovered by his son, who resided in
this city, and who at once took him in hand and procured his admission into the Washingtonian Home.
His nervous system was completely prostrated, and
his body debilitated to a fearful degree. For several
days after his admission he lay in a state of stupor,
from which, by the closest care and attention, he
finally recovered.
He is a good speaker, and-on many
occasions, while addressing temperance meetings, has
feelingly and with tears thanked the Home and its
officers for the aid they extended to him in the hour
of his dark adversity. It is the opinion of the superintendent, in this case, that the fatal habit of drinking
was acquired through and by means of the practice of
taking opiates and stimulants to kill and deaden the
intense pains of neuralgia, with which he had been
for a long time afflicted.
The following beautiful lines were written by this
gentleman upon Mr.
, the noted temperance lecturer, whom we have previously spoken of, and who
was reformed at the Home, upon his presenting to the
institution a photographic likeness of himself, and
which was subscribed with the sentiment of “ God bless
the Home: ’? —
19

218

A

VOICE

FROM

THE

Ay! from thy heart thou well canst say,
In this thy bright and golden day,
As memory doth the past survey,
‘*God bless the Home.”

An army of the bold and true,
Who suffered long as well as you,
Whose hope now paints with rainbow hue
Can bless that Home.
Forth from that Home the risen come,
And bless its love where’er they roam,
As exiles bless their childhood home
In distant lands.
For there the iron fetters broke,
And kindly words the loving spoke,
Burned with God’s fire the galling yoke,
And burst their bands.
When years on years have passed away,
And all our locks are tinged with gray,
Or when we stand in God’s own day,
We’ll shout its praise.

It saved us from the drunkard’s night;
On our dark way it proved its light,
And armed us for the noble fight
Through all our days.
Dark was our life with sin and shame;
We walked in sorrow and in pain,
Bound with the demon’s festering chain,
And could not rise.

But in that Home we saw a star
Shining in glory from afar ;
Its light led on to freedom’s war —
We won its prize.
Now may our arms be strong to save,
And may our hearts beat true and brave,
Nor yield until we reach the grave
Or dwell above.

—

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

219

On for the right in battle’s roar;
Stand for our God forevermore,

Until from earth our spirits soar
Where angels love. Washingtonian Home, Boston.

Mr.
remained at the Home for about three
months, being absent a portion of the time visiting his
different relatives in Boston and vicinity. He left, the
superintendent believes, a thoroughly reformed man;
and perhaps no person ever felt more keenly than he
did the degradation and contempt which his sinful
conduct had brought upon him. He is, we believe,
at present located at Provincetown, on Cape Cod; but
whether engaged in his ministerial functions or not, we
are unable to say. We, however, believe that he will
hereafter remain a temperance total abstinence man,
and that nothing can shake him in the new resolutions
which he has adopted, or cause his feet to swerve from
the only true path that leads to security and selfpreservation. We have lately, since writing the above,
learned from his son that he is now on the Cape advocating the principles of the Home.
Mr.
came to the Home in the month of April.
At the time of his admission he was in an extremely
nervous and depressed condition, brought on by his
wanton indulgence in strong drink. He is a lawyer by
profession, and a man of family. He has not practised
his profession for several years past; but has been engaged in literary pursuits. For a year previous to his
admission to the Home he had been engaged in pre-

220

A VOICE

FROM

THE

paring an historical chart, which had cost him much
mental labor in producing. He had been stopping in
Providence for some time past; and after the completion of his chart and its accompanying Book of Explanation, he started for Boston via Worcester, in order
to make an arrangement with some publishers to bring
his work before the public. Stopping at the latter
place, he fell in company with a friend, who invited
him to partake of a glass of gin. Mr.
, thinking,
as all men who have been or are drinking men most
generally do, that one glass would not injure him; that
he could drink that, and then desist, complied with his
invitation, and then learned — alas, too late ! — that the
danger lay in the slightest violation of the strict rule
of total abstinence ; that destruction

commenced

with

the first glass. He arrived in the city of Boston with
his mind inflamed with the liquor which he had taken,
and his dormant appetite aroused by the fiery stimulant he had so foolishly imbibed.
What was the
result? A prolonged and wild debauch, from which
he at last recovered to find himself like the “ man who
went down from Jerusalem to Jericho and fell among
thieves, who stripped him of his raiment and wounded
him, and left him half dead.” So, indeed, was his
case; for he had pawned his clothes, his watch was
gone, and, as if to crown his misfortune, his manuscript, over which he had been toiling for the last
year, and which he had looked upon as the means

of placing him in comfortable circumstances for the
rest of his days, had been stolen from him; but the

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

yey

first false step had brought all this misery upon him,
and, penniless, friendless, and alone, he knew not where
to go or lay his wearied head. In this condition he
eame to the Washingtonian Home, and applied for admission, in order that he might, if possible, become a
reformed man, and break away from the monster who
had inflicted such dire misery upon him. After his
admission to the institution he resolved firmly, with
the help of God, to break away from and to overcome,
if possible, the terrible appetite which had conquered »
him. He remained an inmate of the Home for about
a month, when he left for his residence in an adjoining
State, with every appearance of being reformed; and
returned to that position which his education and ability warranted him to occupy, but from which he had
unhappily fallen. <A letter written by him subsequent
to his departure from the Home, and addressed to Mr.
Day, the superintendent, shows the feelings he entertains towards the institution, and the benefits he thinks
he has derived from a short residence there.
ALBERT

Day, Esa.

Dear Sir: Having spent some time in the institution known as
the Home, of which you are superintendent, I feel it to be my duty,

as it is my pleasure, to address to you the following letter, not only
as a testimonial of personal regard for yourself and family, but also
for the estimation in which I hold the Home and its influences, under

your efficient management. No one can regret more deeply than
myself the cause which first induced my visit to the Home. I do
not like to dwell upon it, and only wish to remember it when
tempted again to depart from the practice of strict sobriety; suffice

ig*

pars

A VOICE

FROM

THE

it to say, that my course has been similar to that of all others who
have been the slaves of a habit which brings only ruin, varied perhaps in the detail, but precisely similar in the general result. The
last few years have been spent in resolves at reformation,
— spasmodic attempts, — only again to fall; and I had almost despaired of
a permanent reformation, not only as regarded myself, but of others.
Often had I asked the questions, Is there no hope for the inebriate?
Can no influences be brought to bear upon him to assist him in his
struggles ? And when considering these questions, judging not only
from observation but from personal experience, I confess that my
conclusions were any thing but satisfactory.
_
But, since my stay with you, I have been led to think differently.
I now believe there is hope for the inebriate, no matter how degraded
he may have become, provided there is left the desire and the disposition on his part to help himself. I feel that I am a reformed man,
— thoroughly reformed. My determination is no stronger now than
it has many times been, perhaps; but my hope is a much more
rational one. I have at the Home learned lessons which I never can
forget. I had hgard of the Home, it is true, and had formed a very
favorable opinion of it, but was not prepared to witness what I have
beheld. And it appears to me that a case must be hopeless indeed
when one can, after graduating from the Home, return again to his
cups.
The philanthropic efforts of yourself and your co-workers in behalf of the poor inebriate have been crowned with success, and the
result must be gratifying and encouraging to you, which, as I understand, is the greatest remuneration you receive for the great personal
sacrifice you have made.
Yours is a philanthropic and eminently Christian work, and God
will bless your efforts. I trust, now the experiment has been successfully tried, the philanthropy of the city of Boston will be called
to its aid, that its means may be extended in proportion to the magnitude of the object to be attained; that the good people of other
cities will be aroused to this noble work, and that the time will soon

come when the inebriate shall be treated as a patient rather than —

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

923

a brute or criminal. Hitherto the efforts of temperance men have
aimed at the prevention rather than the cure of drunkards ; but now
that it has been demonstrated that the inebriate can be restored, I

trust that this important consideration will no longer be overlooked.
As one who has derived great benefits at the Home, I feel a deep
responsibility resting upon myself, not only as regards my own condition, but also as the success of the institution of the Home

must

be determined by the subsequent conduct of those who have been its
inmates. Considerations of honor alone should have a great and
restraining influence under temptation. I trust that my course in
the future may be such as never to bring the Home into disrepute,
and myself and friends again to disgrace and ruin.
May God bless you and yours in your noble work.
Truly yours.

Mr.
resides in one of the towns in the vicinity
of Boston; has a family, and is a tailor by trade. He
left home without the knowledge of his family and
friends, and came to the institution, fully determined
to place himself under the care of the superintendent,
and, by one final effort, to free himself from his inthralment. .He was admitted in the month of August,
1858. In two days after his admission the superintendent found that his condition was such that, in all
reasonable probability, he would be attacked with the
fearful and terrible disease of delirium tremens. These
fears were realized ; and in two days after his admission, he was suffering agonies which could not be surpassed by the sufferings of any devil in the lowest
depths of hell. For upwards of seventy hours he never
closed his eyes in sleep, but constantly raved and

224

A VOICE

FROM

THE

shouted in terror at the fearful visions which were
presented to his diseased and distracted imagination.
At one time he saw glaring upon him, with distended
jaws, an immense polar bear, whose flashing eyes and
bristling hair seemed to be the forerunner of the brute’s
intentions at the next moment to bound upon and
annihilate him. His struggles to escape his tormentor
were so violent that it became necessary to secure him
by straps to his bed. Again the scene would change,
and the horror-stricken and delirious wretch saw moving towards him, crushing every thing in its path, the
Old South Church, that stands on Washington Street in
the city of Boston. Ten thousand horrors assailed his
soul. His destruction seemed inevitable. Suddenly he
broke from his restraint and fled shivering with fright.
He cowered in the farthest corner of a dark closet
that was in his room.
After much persuasion, and
many assurances that the danger was passed, he was
prevailed upon to come out and return to his bed.
But scarcely had he lain his body upon his couch when
his torments again began. Moving slowly down, in all
its majesty of power and strength, came Bunker Hill
Monument, crushing and destroying and grinding into

dust all that opposed its progress.

He was only pre-

vented from darting from his bed by force.

gles to escape were terrible.

His strug-

At last worn nature was

compelled to yield, and he sunk into a stupor, not of
sleep, but a lethargic state of feebleness and exhaustion.
The scenes which he witnessed, and the wandering
fancies of his frenzied imagination, were wonderful and

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

225

fearful to contemplate. From a state of intense darkness he suddenly found himself surrounded by the most
vivid and brilliant light. Around him were legions of
devils, flying to and fro, and bearing in their hands
red-hot irons, with which they were continually pricking and burning the forms and bodies of men with
which the place was filled.
|
Among the crowd he recognized many of his boon
companions, who had often drank with him, and who
had, through their intemperate habits, been brought to
an early and premature grave. He was led along
through walks laid out like garden paths, and bordered
with beds like those which are seen in gardens; but
they were composed of living coals of fire, which
numerous devils, with long iron rakes, were continually

moving and inciting to fiercer heat and action. Every
moment did he expect the devils would throw him down
upon the bed of red-hot coals; but they moved on,
seeming to be leading him to some place where his
presence was expected. They appeared to be passing
along a terrace, when, looking down, a scene of indescribable horror met his view. Below him was an
immense caldron of boiling oil, in which were men
and women melting and boiling in that horrid pot.
Struggling in the grasp of several demons was a young
and beautiful girl, whom they were about to toss in,
with her features of the pallor of death, and her long,
black hair floating in wild disorder around her bare
shoulders.
She stretched forth her arms, and piteously
implored mercy. At a sight of that ghastly, upturned

226

A VOICE

FROM

THE

face, he shrieked out in fearful agony, for in her he
recognized his own daughter, who, in his drunken madness, he had, while living, driven from her home, and
who, in her misery, had fallen from woman’s high
estate. He struggled in vain with his conductors; but
they hurried him on, with her shrieks of agony and
despair ringing in his ears, and tearing his very heartstrings with torment.
|
Soon they entered a large pavilion, where millions
of lights rendered the place brighter than the brightest
noonday. Upon a raised platform sat a hideous and
terrible figure, whose evil eye it was impossible to look
upon. He was dragged by his conductors before the
throne of this horrid being, who, in a voice of thunder,
roared out, “Down with the drunkard! the destroyer
of his own flesh and blood; down with him, who
caused his own daughter’s dishonor, into the lowest
depths of the bottomless pit!’’? Again he was hurried
along to a place where all was night and gloom. They
came to the mouth of a yawning gulf, whose pitchy
darkness no eye could fathom, while up from the inky
gloom came the fierce and feeble wailings of agony,
desperation, and despair. Struggling he was dragged
to the brink, and dashed down into that thick darkness.
Down, down he went, oppressed and stunned by the
oppressive gloom, until all consciousness was gone.
When reason returned, life hung suspended by a single
thread;

but

strict

attention

and

unremitted

care

brought back to the sufferer health and strength.
Health — yes, comparative health ; but who but the all-

Ae

af 1 Paes ie

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

297 -

seeing eye of God can tell the terrible ravages those
scenes of agony made upon the brain, or the inroads
such abuse entailed upon his constitution! After his
recovery he left the Home, determined in the future,
with the aid of God his creator, to abstain from drink;
and up to«the time of our writing he has strictly and
religiously adhered to that resolution.
Mr.
was born in Maine; but at an early age
came with his parents to Boston. The elder Mr.
is an extensive owner of real estate and wharf interests
in the city, and has always been esteemed for his professed and practical piety, his devotion to his family
affections, assiduity and correctness in business, his
promptness in contributing the assistance demanded by
his participation in community of feeling, and his uniform and general benevolence.
Notwithstanding the
influences which a father, with such heart-promptings
and such practice, would try to surround a son, he was
pained to know that son to be a victim to intemperance
before the attainment to a fifteenth birthday. All the
resorts which a father’s love, a father’s authority, a
father’s ingenuity, a father’s despair prompted, were
made to play ; but without effect.
For twenty-five years the son persisted in his habits
of excess, and for twenty-five years, with agony and
prayer, the father watched the successive steps of
the son from positions of importance to places of
less and less responsibility, until his final resting in the
seeming recklessness of the drunkard’s inaction, careless of a wife’s love and children’s present condition

228

A VOICE

FROM

THE

and future course.
Even his wife’s death failed to
produce such a shock as was fondly hoped would be
the only good temporal result to accrue from her leaying the sorrows here, to embrace the blessedness of a
rest in the eternity of God; and yet the father’s care
continued to him and followed him even to other
states and distant cities, ministering to him in his sickness from debauches, in soothing solicitations to leave
the habit which so long had rendered him unfitted
for every social and manly relationship. So long had
he been sinking the roughened irons of agony, degree
by degree, until the cold division of despair was
almost reached in the heart of a father, who had
offered bribes, and invoked the assistance of kind
seclusion and restraint, employed by authority ; but,
alas! in vain. Periods of sobriety and excess alternated during his widowerhood.
One interim of sobriety
was sufficiently prolonged to restore him to the power
of reflection and full remembrance of his loss in the
death of a wife, and

a realization

of the absence of

those cares, and comforts, and sympathies peculiar to
the marital relationship, so much needed by every man
naturally of pure sentiments and sympathies; and he
prefigured
“The twilight of age as but drear if it borrow
No charms from the smile of wife, children, and friends.”

His noble appearance, very extensive general acquirements, and perfect capacity to apply them, fine per-

sonal address, commanding familiarity with language,

a

Sere

wv

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

229°

and exceeding pleasantness in the exercise of conversational powers, enabled him to gain the love of one
whose confiding affections were evidenced by going
with him to the altar, and assuming the duties of wife,
relying on his promise that their future should not be
marred by a recurrence of his excesses; but, alas!
his goal was won—a desire to attain which sobriety
was necessary was filled. In the heat of a presidential campaign —the political arena having charmed
him always, and his partisan feelings ever leading him
into active service —he indulged in a glass. Inebriation very soon followed ; excess succeeded excess
one after another, until, after a night’s walk alone, but
under the influence of liquor, and when the doting
father and fond wife knew not of his whereabouts, he
in the strength of determination turned his steps to the
Washingtonian Home, and made appeal to the worthy
superintendent to aid him in the attainment of relief
from the monster

cursé which enslaved him.

In kind

ness his hand was grasped, and kindly was he supported
up the stairs and through the hall, on the wall of which
was suspended, in golden letters, the kind, significant
expression of the apostle, “ Do thyself no harm;
and
in the depths of his own heart he experienced all the
poignancy of one wounded by the sword, and that sword
wielded by himself.
He was bedded and ministered to in kindness ; and,
after three days’ close communing, being assisted to
attain a knowledge of his self-submission to an enemy,
and the secret of its power, he exclaimed, “ Eureka!
20

230

‘A VOICE

FROM

THE

not one drop of any thing intoxicating to my physical
man ; no beveragic indulgence whatever, — so that my
moral part may be sustained and strengthened ; that
I may be effectually guarded against the possibility of
encroachment from the source of all my failures, to
minister to the hopes, and satisfy the desires of myself
and friends, and the inherent demands of society.”
For six months, with increasing hopes, but with
almost visible tremblings from doubt, did his father
watch unceasingly, never daring to express himself as
even hoping, much less as being confident, but every
successive day felt himself renewed in the affections of
his heart, and in the vigor of his body, now bent with
years and the weight of long-continued sorrow.
And,
but a few weeks have gone since, at a social gathering
in the hall of the Home, with tears of gladness distilling from his eyes, did he give a detail of his griefs, and
his now lightness of soul in the belief that he will lay
himself down in the grave, having left time with the
full knowledge that his son is sober—redeemed from
the dominion of drink. That son has been, for twelve
months or more, in the enjoyment of family cares, and
sympathies, and associations, and in the consciousness
of making his father’s last his best days, and laboring zealously in attempting the reformation of others,
confident to-day in the perpetuity of his own as he was
the day he left the Home, because he preserves a sensitive familiarity with the necessity of guarding against
the remotest approaches to indulgence, either through
his physical or moral man.
‘

WASHINGTONIAN

HOMR.

pre F

In the cases which we have cited, for the benefit of

the reader, we have only taken up promiscuously a few
of the many hundreds who have been received, cured,
and discharged as cured, from the Washingtonian
Home.
The institution, small and limited as _ its
means and accommodations are, has been the means
of saving hundreds from a drunkard’s grave, and restoring to their friends and families men whose education and intellectual ability warrant them a position
among the noblest and greatest in the land. The
directors and officers of the Home feel that it is but
in its infancy, and that the day is not far distant when
a building capable of accommodating its hundreds will
be at their disposal, and be the means of redeeming
thousands who, but for its kind and fostering care,
must be lost for time and for eternity. Already among
its graduates are numbered men of almost all trades
and occupations; and all the learned professions have
been represented within its walls, and many of them
returned to fill high official positions in their native
States. The present acting attorney-general of a neighboring State graduated from the Home ; and its former
inmates may be found, young as the institution is, in
almost every State of the Union and territory of the
United States, from the icy coast of Northern Maine to
the Pacific shores of far-off California. At this period
of the publication of this work six hundred and fifty
inmates have been admitted, and discharged from the
Home as cured and reformed, two thirds of whom, we
have’ every reason to believe, are to-day true and upright temperance men.

BE?

A VOICE

FROM

THE

A. singular coincidence connected with the publication of this book has occurred, which is possessed of
too deep an interest to pass unnoticed ; and we have,
since our manuscript first went into the hands of the
printer, introduced this matter in our previously completed work. The publisher, the manufacturer of the
paper, the engraver of the frontispiece, and the writer
of this book, are all graduates of the Washingtonian
Home.
Is it not truly a circumstance of singular
coincidence ? yet we assure the reader that it occurred
without any concert of action, and was unknown even
to themselves until all the contracts for the different
branches of art in getting up this work had been made
and the different artisans became known to each other.
Truly the Home numbers among her graduates men of
all trades and professions.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

CHAPTER

X.

233°

‘** Ay, now I see my deadly foe,
His hideous work appears;
He lurks within the poisonous bowl,
Mid sighs, and groans, and tears.”

In order that our readers may be made acquainted
with some of the effects and results produced by the
excessive use of alcoholic stimulant upon the human
system, in its injurious operations upon the internal
organs of the body, and the unnatural and diseased
state which they present to the physician as they are exposed by dissection, we have taken the liberty to copy
an article upon drunkenness, as it appears in Prof.
Lee’s revised edition of Copeland’s Dictionary of Medicine, published a few years since under the supervision
and direction of that gentleman, by Harper and Brothers; a most invaluable work, being a library in itself
upon the symptoms and treatment of almost all known
diseases which human flesh is heir to in regard to drunkenness. The learned author says:
“The frequent occurrence of intoxication, either
casually or as a confirmed habit, would justify the
notice | am about to take of it even independently
20*

934

- A VOICE

FROM

THE

of its influence in causing and modifying disease.
Drunkenness, in its various phases, from the daily indulgence in more vinous or spirituous fluids than are
required, but short of affecting the nervous system in a
very evident manner, up to that degree of excess by
which the senses and intellects become obscured or
entirely lost, predisposes to many diseases and directly
causes others.
Slighter excesses in the use of fermented liquors, particularly wine and malt liquors,
occasion plethora, with all the consequent ills, especially gout, apoplexy, paralysis, and congestion of the
abdominal viscera. Greater excesses and the too free
use of spirits exhaust nervous and vital power, inducing tremors, nervousness, delirium tremens, encephalitis, paralysis, and insanity; occasion affections of the
digestive organs, particularly anexeria and dyspepsia, —
diarrhcea and dysentery, inflammation and structural
changes of the biliary organs, and produce disorders
of the urinary and sexual functions, even sterility and
impotency, and ultimately lesions of the kidneys and
dropsies.
.
‘¢Drunkenness is not a vice of recent date, although
it may have become more common with the progress
and diffusion of luxury. We find it mentioned in the
early history of the Jews, and Tacitus informs us that
it was prevalent among the Germans. It is tolerably
evident, from the ancient lyric and dramatic poets and
satirists, that it was by no means infrequent among the
higher classes in Greece and Rome. Hippocrates notices its worst states, both in his Aphorisms and in his

aa

Pe *

WASHINGTONIAN HOME.

(285

Prognostics, and it does not appear to have been
considered a very culpable sort of indulgence even by
some of the sages of antiquity. Plato cautions against
allowing wine to youths at an earlier age than eighteen
years, and against becoming intoxicated before forty;
but after this age he considered some degree of indulgence in this way pardonable.
“It is evident that the vice increased among the aneients with the diffusion of luxury, until at last even
the ladies occasionally followed the example so generally set them. Valerius Maximus states that, in the
earlier periods of Roman history, the women seldom
drank; and Seneca remarks that, at a later period,
they indulged so freely in this way that they became
nearly as subject to the diseases occasioned by the practice as the men.
Erroneous opinions as to the effects
of intoxication upon the human system seem to have
been very early entertained, and were generally prevalent in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
“There can be no doubt, however, that, as expressed
by the late Dr. Gregory, an occasional excess is, upon
the whole, less injurious to the constitution than the

practice of taking daily a moderate quantity of any
fermented liquor or spirits.
“Causes. This destructive habit, not many years ago,
was but too prevalent, even in the upper classes, in the
more northerly countries of Europe; fortunately it now
no longer exists, or not nearly to the same extent as
before; but it is still as general as ever among the lower
orders, and those of weak constitutions, who have been

236

A VOICE FROM

THE ~

indulged in youth, or uncontrolled or accustomed at
that age to taste cordials and spirituous liquors, or who
possess little force of character or firmness of resolution. The unfortunate and unhappy, those of uncertain occupations, or whose homes are made miserable ;
also tavern-keepers, coachmen, commercial travellers,
singers, working mechanics, those whose parents have
been drunkards, and those who are idle and unoccupied,
and frequent clubs, meetings of lodges, often have recourse

to it.

The weak, good-natured, and social not.

infrequently become addicted to it from the manners
and indulgences of those with whom they associate,
until the want of the accustomed stimulus becomes
distressing, and the resolution gives way before the
desire of gratifying it, and thus the habit is confirmed.
‘‘Symproms.
The earlier phenomena of ebriety are
mental exhilaration, joyousness, dissipation of care,
with talkativeness, flushed countenance, increased animation of the features, especially of the eyes, a more
copious transpiration from the cutaneous and pulmonary-surfaces, and secretion of urine, augmented thirst,
and full, frequent, strong pulse. If the intoxicating
fluid be more largely partaken of, vertigo, tinnitus aurium, double vision, and an unconnected train of ideas,
generally uncontrolled by the will, supervene.
During
slight intoxication the prevailing disposition and pursuits are made manifest, and hence the saying, ‘ In vino
veritas.’ The irritable and ill-tempered become quarrelsome ; the weak and silly are boisterous with laugh-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOMR.

paige

‘ter and mirth, and profuse in offers of service ;and the
sad and hypocondriacal readily burst into tears and
dwell on mournful topics. In a more advanced stage
the excitement approaches nearly to that of delirium;
the conceptions become disordered, the ideas confused,
and various hallucinations sometimes are observed.
The voice is thick, the eyes vacant, the face pale, the
voluntary motions imperfect and unsteady, and the
limbs tremulous or incapable of their offices. Vomiting occasionally occurs in this state, and either diminishes or shortens the consecutive state of stupor.
‘‘The phenomena of deep intoxication have been very
closely and acutely studied by Dr. Ogston, whose opportunities of witnessing them, particularly in their
-more dangerous associations, and as following the use
of ardent spirits have been unusually great; I shall
therefore follow, in a great measure, the description he
has given of them. It should be recollected that the
effects of spirits, or other intoxicating liquors, on the
_ system, will vary with the habits of the individual, with
_the state of body, especially as respects muscular
_ plethora, with the kind of inebriating agent indulged in,
and the existing condition of stomach, chiefly as respects the presence of alimentary matter.
But the
‘most powerful modifying agent is temperature. Warmth
increases the nervous and vascular excitement characterizing the early stage, and diminishes the consequent
exhaustion.
Cold suppresses and shortens the early excitement, and hastens as well as augments the oppression and exhaustion of the advanced stage. In the

238

A VOICE

FROM

THE

larger proportion of cases, however, after a longer or
shorter period of unusual mental vigor, nervous excitement and increased action, varying according to
the surrounding temperature, the brain becomes oppressed, the powers of voluntary motion, which are
early impaired, fail entirely ; the mental manifestations
are suspended, and, in the most severe cases, sensation
is completely lost. In most instances, this stage supervenes gradually ; but sudden exposure to cold will often
rapidly induce it. The person feels drowsy, and appears to fall into a sound sleep; but it is discovered,
when the attempt is made, that he cannot be aroused
to consciousness by any effort, or if he partially succeed, he is hardly sensible of surrounding objects, and
immediately lapses into his former state, the limbs remaining in whatever position they are placed. At this
period, the face is pale, with or without nausea, or it is
flushed ; the eyes are vacant and suffused, and sometimes glazed; the pupils dilated and contracting very
imperfectly or not at all, by the exposure to light.
The temperature of the head’ is generally above natural; but that of the extremities, and often of the surface generally, is considerably lowered, or but little affected. In the milder cases, the pulse, which are at first
quick and excited, become feeble, small, and ultimately
slow, and entirely wanting at the wrist, according to the

degree of intoxication. Respiration is usually infrequent; the separate acts of inspiration and expiration,
particularly the former, occupying a very short time,
‘and is wholly or chiefly abdominal. The breathing is

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

239

often laborious in the most advanced stages, and in
these the inspirations are convulsive, the chest expanding by the rapid contractions of the associated muscles
of respiration. Strabismus, or tetanic convulsions, or
spasms, of particular parts, sometimes supervene in the
more advanced states, and are unfavorable signs.
_‘ Such is the more common state or form of deep intoxication; but alcohol occasionally causes modified
effects, and without much previous excitement, but always with more or less mental disturbance, producing
prostration of the functions of the brain, the intellect’s
volition and sensation failing almost simultaneously.
In these cases the face is pale; the eyes are more or less
lively or injected ; the pupils contracted ; the pulse frequent, full, and soft; the respiration laborious, or
strenuous ; the temperature uniform, and either at or
above the natural standard, but seldom below it. The

circulation, respiration, and generation of animal heat
may go on for a considerable time in these, notwithstanding the paralysis of the brain, or continued until
this organ has recovered from its torpor, provided the
body be not exposed to a cold atmosphere, or placed in
unfavorable circumstances.
_ * APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH. Thes every nearly re_ semble those produced by asphyxia. The countenance
presents marks of anxiety, or of convulsion ; the eyes

are prominent; the pupils dilated; the face livid, or
swollen ; the lips blue; the cellular tissue injected with
dark fluid blood ; the air-passages reddened ; the lungs
dilated, and loaded with dark fluid blood, and more or

240

A VOICE

FROM

THE

~

less frothy mucus in the air-cells. The right cavities of —
the heart, the venz cave, and the pulmonary artery are
filled with blood of a similar appearance. The left
ventricle, aorta, and coronary veins also contain a little
dark blood, and the liver and kidneys are loaded with
it. Blood possessing the same characters also fills the
sinuous veins, and even the smaller vessels of the encephalon. The cerebral structure is generally firmer
than usual. More or less serum is found in the ventricles and between the membranes of the brain. Dr.
Ogston confirms the testimony of Wepfer, Voight, Carlisle, and others, as to the effused fluid being impregnated with alcohol. In describing the appearances in
one of his cases, he states that about four ounces of the
fluid were found in the ventricles, having all the physical qualities of alcohol, as proved by the united testimony of two other medical men who saw the body
opened and examined the fluid. He thinks that the
effusion takes place previously to the coma* of intoxi-—
cation, as he found it in considerable quantity in two
cases of drowning in the stage of violent excitement
from spirits. Muller states that he found air in the
sinews of the encephalon. The mucous coat of the
stomach, particularly in habitual drunkards, is thickened and softened ; this latter change sometimes existing throughout the whole extent of the small intestines.
In rarer cases the coats of the stomach are remarkably
' thickened and hardened.
Injection, and sometimes
ulceration of the small intestines, are also met with. —
* Sleep.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

241

The liver is frequently mottled, enlarged, and otherwise
diseased. The kidneys are often enlarged, softened,
paler than usual, granulated, and the urinary bladder
greatly enlarged and thickened.
‘‘THE StoMacH.
The case of St. Martin furnished
Dr. Beaumont an opportunity of determining the true
effects of alcohol upon the mucous membrane of the
stomach. After causing him to drink ardent spirits
pretty freely for some days, Dr. B. found ‘some
erythema (inflammation) and aphthous patches upon
the mucous surface, which increased daily in extent
and intensity, until they became livid, and blood mixed
with muco-purulent matter exuded from the diseased

surfaces.’

The gastric secretions

also, at the same

time, became deranged, and, what is worthy of particular note, the health continued good, and the patient
complained of no uneasy or painful sensation.
The
free use of ardent spirits — wine, beer, or any alcoholic
drink, when continued for some days — invariably produced these morbid changes. In the language of Dr.
B., ‘ These morbid changes and conditions were seldom
indicated by any ordinary symptoms or particular sensations described or complained of, unless when in considerable excess. They could not, in fact, have been
anticipated by any external symptoms; and their existence was only ascertained by actual ocular demonstration.’
“The local effects of alcohol on man vary with the
strength of the liquid, the substances with which it is
combined, the quantity taken, and the constitution of
21

2A,

A VOICE

FROM

THE

the patient. In all cases it acts as a powerfully irritant
and caustic poison. Wherever it is applied it causes
contraction and condensation of the tissues, and gives
rise to pain, heat, redness, and other symptoms of
inflammation.
These effects depend on the chemical
influence of alcohol over the constituents of the tissues ; for its strong affinity for water causes it to abstract the latter from soft living parts with which it
comes in contact; and when these are of an albuminous or fibrinous nature, it coagulates the liquid albumen and fibrine, and thus increases the density of the
tissue. Dr. Thompson very naturally supposes that the
irritation and inflammation set up in parts to which
alcohol is applied depend partly on the resistance which
the living tissue makes to the chemical influence of
the poison ; in other words, that it is the reaction of the
vital powers, brought about by the chemical action of
alcohol. The first effects of alcohol, therefore, we find
to be a condensation and thickening of the coats of

the stomach; but long-continued irritation and inflammation cause complete disorganization, breaking down
the tissues. It is a soft, pulpy mass, bearing no resemblance whatever to the original healthy membrane.
‘¢ Where a person has been in the habit, for any length
of time, of indulging in the excessive use of alcoholic
stimulants, we generally find the mucous membrane
of the stomach presenting morbid changes. These are |
modified by such a variety of circumstances that the
appearances by no means correspond in different subjects, though there is a common type running through

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

243

them all of so striking and so well marked a character
that the experienced eye will be able to detect them
almost at a single glance. Portions, if not the entire,
surface of the stomach will often be found of an unnatural color, and more or less softened, and sometimes
entirely abraded of its mucous coat. In cases of comparatively

recent

origin

the mucous

membrane

will,

for the most part, be found thickened. with lymph
upon its surface, or an effusion of serosity into its subjacent cellular tissue. Under such circumstances the
stomach will often contain a quantity of inspissated
and tenacious mucus or purulent matter, and the
vessels, both arteries and veins, will be found fully
injected, giving it a dusky fluid hue. We have found
in several instances of this kind patches of a dark
livid or blue color, owing to the extravasation of blood
into the submucous cellular tissue, whence it had
spread into the proper villous membrane.
Whether
this be owing to the rupture of minute capillaries or
to vascular exosmosis, it is not easy to determine; although, judging from what we observe on other mucous
surfaces, these ecchymoses are properly due to the
latter cause. Occasionally we find patches of ulceration scattered over the gastric mucous membrane of
the drunkard, which is not at all remarkable, considering the delicacy of its organization, the variety of its
functions, and, above all, the nature of the substances
with which it is sometimes brought in contact. These
ulcerations are extremely visible, both as to shape, and
depth, and duration. In the case of St. Martin, upon

244

A VOICE

FROM

THE

whom Dr. Beaumont’s experiments were performed,
after the free use of spirituous drinks for a few days,
erythematous and aphthous patches appeared upon the
mucous surface, exuding small drops of grumous blood.
and muco-purulent secretions, resembling the discharge
from the bowels in cases of chronic dysentery, which
entirely disappeared on the withdrawal of the cause in
the course of five or six days. In this case, too, the
mucous membrane appeared thickened or hypertrophied,
and the gastric secretions were all vitiated, although
“no very essential aberration of the function of the
stomach was manifested.’ But it is not uncommon to
such subjects to find ulcerations of the mucous membrane of a jagged, irregular form, with slightly elevated
and indurated edges, either hard fissured or granulated,
varying in size from that of a pea to that of a dollar,
or larger; and we have seen instances in which the
whole mucous membrane had been removed by a gradual process of ulceration and softening. The edges of
these erosions are usually highly florid or brownish;
they are often covered with an aphthous crust, which
conceals their depth, and the subjacent textures are, for
the most part, in a state of hypertrophy.
‘‘ Where habits of intemperate drinking have been
long persisted in, the disorganization of the mucous
membrane will be sometimes complete, it having gone
through every grade of pathological change —slight
injection, increase, and the loss of innervation, permanent congestion of the capillaries, hypertrophy, softening, ulceration, erosion or abrasion of the mucous

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

245

coat, (sometimes gangrene,) death. But few are the
cases, however, where the wretched sufferer survives
during the accomplishment of all these successive and
inevitable changes. Predisposed, as every organ is, to
the attacks of disease, he early encounters some malady, over which, in such a morbid condition of the system, medicine has no control, and to which he speedily
falls a victim.
“Tt is a remarkable circumstance, and one which
shows, in a very striking light, the recuperative powers
of nature, that ulcerations of the character above
described will heal or undergo a process of reparation
upon the withdrawal of the cause, (alcohol,) which

produced them. We see how readily ulcers cicatrize
on the skin and other parts of the body; and there
can be no doubt that they heal with almost equal facility upon the gastro-interitic mucous membrane, provided they are left at rest and not stimulated by the
application of artificial excitants. We have noticed,
in a few cases of reformed drunkards after death from

other diseases, numerous cicatrices in the stomach of a
bluish color, having a dense texture of a fibrous character, differing wholly in appearance from the natural
healthy tissue, having their edges thickened and puckered as represented in some of the plates of Cruveilhier’s Pathological Anatomy of Man, (Livraison Y.,
p- 7, plates 5 and 6.) Such reparation, however, we
have reason to believe, is extremely rare, if indeed it
ever occurs where the intemperate or even moderate
use of alcoholic drinks is persisted in after these
21"

246

A VOICE

FROM

THE

ulcerations have already formed, as the irritation kept
up successfully baffles all the salutary efforts of nature.
But where bland substances, like farinaceous food, only
are brought in contact with them, a fibrinous substance,
where the ulceration is deep, forms at the base of the
sore, which subsequently becomes a granulating surface,
pouring out a thin, muco-purulent fluid, and this process
goes on until the ulcer is completely filled, and presenting the appearances already described. And there is
another fact well known to the pathologist, namely, that
the substance composing the new mucous membrane
possesses very different properties from those of the old,
it being destitute of follicles, whose function in a healthy
stomach is to secrete mucous, and having a texture
enjoying a lower degree of vitality, and, consequently,
more exposed to, as well as more rapidly destroyed by,
subsequent attacks of disease.
We do not wish to be
understood as maintaining that the ulcerations in question are caused solely by spirituous drinks; we know they
are produced by other causes, and are not unfrequently
met with in typhus and other fevers, as well as in other
diseases, even when their existence is not suspected
during life. Indeed, it is a peculiarity attending these
morbid changes, that they are often unaccompanied
with any well-marked symptoms during life; and when
they do give rise to morbid phenomena, the latter are
of so obscure and ambiguous a character as to enable
us to form no certain diagnosis as to the real pathology
of the case. There may be an obscure pain in the epigastric region, nausea, occasional vomiting, colicky uneasi-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

ysUe

ness, together with other symptoms of erosive. gastritis;
but these often attend mere functional disorders of the
stomach, as well as organic affections of the same organ.
If there is much fever and emaciation, attended with
vomitings of blood, we may, with greater confidence,
predict the existence of such pathological changes.
~But, after all, our diagnosis is obscure and doubtful.
3
“‘In many cases where persons have been long addicted to the free use of alcoholic drinks, especially
distilled liquors, but have not carried it to that excess
as to deserve the name of drunkards, or of even being
called intemperate, we often find a degree of discoloration, and an amount of disease in the mucous membrane of the stomach, as great, and sometimes even
greater, than in some confirmed inebriates. These are

the persons who break down early under the use of
artificial stimulants, whose organs oppose a less successful resistance to the attacks of morbific agents, and
who sink under diseases which ordinarily are unattended with danger. And such constitute a majority
of those usually denominated drunkards.
‘We have already observed that the color of the
mucous membrane, in these cases, is very variable, ranging from an ashy paleness through every modification
of red, yellow, brown, and purple, to black. We have
lately had an opportunity of examining the stomach
of several drunkards, and while we have been struck
with the above fact, we have also noticed that the portions of the stomach most apt to be discolored and

248

A VOICE

FROM

THE

ulcerated were the cul-de-sac and great curvature,
doubtless from their being more in contact with the
alcoholic irritant. A few days since we examined the
stomach of a man who had abstained from intoxicating
drinks for about a year, after having for several years
been addicted to their intemperate use, but for the last
four weeks had again been indulging, to the extent of
daily intoxication, in the same liquors. He was killed
by a blow in a drunken fray, while in a state of intoxication, and about two hours after having ate a hearty
dinner. The following notes were recorded at the time:
‘The

stomach

contained

about a pint of half-digested

food. On remoying the contents, and carefully washing the inner surface, the whole of the lower portion
surrounding the pyloric orifice, together with the greater
curvature, were completely suffused and injected, as if
it had been covered with a coating of red paint. There
were no ruge visible, but the mucous surface generally
was more highly vascular than natural. On holding
up the stomach to the light, the arteries and veins presented a most beautiful appearance, the former presenting a vermilion and the latter a purple color,
and ramifying in eyery direction, so as to occupy the

greatest part of the surface. A considerable portion
of the mucous membrane was covered with small dusky
or vermilion spots, which at first were taken for extravasations of blood; but on examining them with a microscope, they were found to be produced by a thick cluster
of minute capillaries. The texture of the mucous
membrane was softer than natural, and covered with

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

249

a thick and glairy mucous.’ In this case the morbid
changes were not very great; and as death occurred
suddenly during the process of digestion, it is highly

probable that the vascularity was, at least in part, due |
to this cause. The specks which were so freely scattered
over the surface were evidently caused by an injection
of the inlaced capillary vessels supplying the mucous
follicles, as the membrane at these points was sensibly
elevated and swollen from tumefaction caused by the
increased vascularity.
‘* A priori reasoning would lead us to believe that
where so sensible and delicate a tissue as that which
lines the human stomach had been subjected for weeks,
or months, or years, to the almost constant application
of so acrid a stimulant as alcohol, the increased innervation, congestion, and consequent phlogosis thus induced, would terminate in a general softening of the
tissue, and, if life were sufficiently protracted, to its
actual disorganization. And such we have found to
be its actual condition in such cases. We have stated
that the first effect of alcoholic liquors upon the
stomach, in a person unaccustomed to their use, is
an exaltation of all its functions, innervation, secretions, muscular contraction, and nutrition. Hypertrophy, or a thickening of all its tissues, follows
as a necessary result. The digestive process is accelerated ; the food passes from the stomach in a
shorter space of time, and, to all appearance, the general health is benefited rather than otherwise, provided the quantity of stimulus taken is not excessive.

250-

A VOICE

FROM

THE

In a few days, or weeks, or months, according to the
degree of indulgence, a different train of symptoms
appear; the premonitory signs of gastritis, under the
popular name of dyspepsia or indigestion, begin to
occur; the gastric mucous surface has become the seat
of a chronic irritation; its blood vessels are permanently congested ; its tissue softened and brittle, and
perhaps studded over with small ulcerations, either
covered with an aphthous crust or a muco-purulent
matter, sometimes mixed with blood.
Nausea and
vomiting, the kind monitors that Nature sends to
teach her erring children to withhold the poison
that is preying upon their vitals, prompts the vic-

tim of self-created appetite to abstain for a while till
her plastic hand repairs the mischief and restores the
healthy function. The respite, however, is but temporary. Led on by a morbid taste, he easily falls a
prey to temptation, to which a weakened moral sense
opposes but a feeble barrier. At length the vis medicatriz, tired with fruitless resistance and her forces
prostrated by reiterated attacks, ceases her conservative
efforts and gives up her temple, the body, to the operation of those chemical laws against which she has so
long waged an unequal, and, as the result has proyed,
_ an unsuccessful warfare. The degree of softening, and
other changes of the gastric mucous membrane, will be
proportioned, ceteris paribus, to the length of time
during which this warfare has been carried on. We
have already described

its first stage.

In the second,

its cohesive powers are so far destroyed that the slight-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

251

est motion over it with the finger converts it into a soft
and grayish pulp, having no appearance of an organized tissue, nor possessing any of its properties. In some
cases,
— especially in those in which the patient had, for
some time before death, either vomited up his food or
had but little appetite for it, and where alcoholic drinks
had constituted the principal if not the only ingesta,—
large patches, if not the whole of the mucous coat, will
be found wanting, the sub-mucous cellular tissue, in a
state of disorganization, forming now the inner coat, or
itself, also, having been removed in a like manner.
Such a case came under our observation, not long since,
in an [rishman, whom we had known as an incorrigible
drunkard for at least fifteen years, and who, during the
last six months of his life, had been able to retain but
little food on his stomach.
Brandy, gin, and rum constituted both his food and drink;

and while he could

obtain these he desired nothing else. At length he
died in a fit of delirium tremens, and on examination
there was no gastric mucous membrane to be found;
the muscular coat being exposed, as if it had been laid
bare with a scalpel. In some instances the mucous
membrane is nearly white, with distinct, flat, mammillated elevations of small size; and where large quantities of ardent spirits are drunk just before death, the
‘stomach will be found thrown into wrinkles, as if from
the action of an astringent substance. In other cases,
dark spots beneath the mucous coat show the previous
existence of hemorrhagic inflammation.
In other cases
of drunkards, we have often seen what Cruveilhier. has

252,

A

VOICE

FROM

THE

called ‘ gelatiniform softening,’ where all the tunics of
the stomach could be torn with the greatest ease — the
cellular and mucous tissues having been reduced to
a’ jelly-like consistence.
We are satisfied that such
stomachs are more common than is generally supposed;
for, from the known properties of alcohol and its strong
affinity for water, it must decidedly tend to destroy the
vital cohesion of the tissues with which it comes in
contact.
Such an opinion, moreover, is fully confirmed
by positive observation. From such facts as have come
within our notice, we have been led to connect nervous
tremblings and irregular action of the muscles with

this pathological condition of the stomach; farther
observations, however, will be necessary to fully settle
the question whether they sustain to each other the
relation of cause and effect. To recapitulate, then, we
would say, that in a healthy state the gastric mucous
membrane may be easily separated and removed in
shreds or strips, possessing a good degree of cohesion
in the first grade of softening; from alcoholic drinks
and other causes, it can scarcely be detached in
shreds, nor with the greatest care to that extent as
in health, and it may easily be removed by scraping
with the finger-nail. In the next degree we find it
still more easily reduced to a pulp, and not possessing sufficient tenacity to be separated at all in
shreds; and we have only to proceed a grade higher
when portions or the whole of it will be found entirely
wanting
— the sub-villous tissue appearing quite bare.

The portions of the stomach from whence the mucous

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

B58

coat is usually first abraded, are the most depending
parts of the larger curvature, where food and drinks
are necessarily more in contact with its surface.
‘‘ When we consider that the tissues of the stomach
are of an extremely delicate texture; that its nerves
and blood-vessels are more abundant than those of any
other organ of the body ; that its nerves especially are
remarkable, not only for their number, but also for the
variety of the sources whence they are obtained, we
shall understand why it is that this organ is more exquisitely sensible than any other; why it partakes of
all the general actions of the system; why it sympathizes in all its changes of its individual organs ; why
it constitutes a common centre by which all the organic
functions are connected together and their motions
regulated ; why it is so susceptible to the influence of
unnatural stimulants, and, from their application, undergoes such important changes both in color and
function.
“These pathological facts show why it is that the
reformation of drunkards can only be effected by total
abstinence. As long as an unnatural stimulant is applied to the mucous membrane, so long will its functions remain abnormal, its blood vessels preternaturally congested, its nerves shattered, and nothing but
a total withdrawal of the cause, whether in the more
concentrated form of distilled spirits or the more bland
but deceptive compounds of fermented liquors, will
effect a restoration to healthy structure and _ function. It is perfectly astonishing in such cases to wit22

B54.

A VOICE

FROM

THE

ness the extraordinary renovating powers of nature.
A. person who has been in the habit of the intemperate
use of alcoholic drinks for years, who, from disorganization of his stomach, has lost the desire for food as well
as the power of digesting it, has but to abstain entirely
for a few weeks or months and the healthy functions
of this vital organ appear to be in a good degree restored. Appetite returns, digestion, assimilation, and
nutrition seem to be performed with their usual vigor,
and flesh and strength, steady nerves, and a clear head
follow in their train; but the stomach

of a reformed

inebriate is ready to take fire at the first approach of
the fiery element.
Instantly on its application the
blood vessels again become dilated, its morbid sensibility reproduced, the smothered cravings of unnatural
thirst restored, and, if indulged, the same distressing
symptoms from which he has been relieved succeed.
|
‘Facilis descensus Averni,
Sed revocare gradum, hic labor, hoc opus est.’

But the longer total abstinence is practised the easier
it becomes. Here is a pathological condition to be
overcome, morbid functions to be restored; and nature
will allow no dallying with the enemy who has intrenched himself within her strongest citadel. There
must be a total evacuation of the premises before the
victory is complete, a yielding, too, of all the outposts
before its fruits can be fully enjoyed. It is a question
yet to be determined whether the mucous membrane
of the stomach, in cases of protracted drunkenness, is
ever entirely restored, whether it does not always bear

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

255

marks of the violence and disorganization which it has
previously suffered.
“Where the structure properly remains entire, or
without perceptible change, it is a fact of every day’s
observation that the modifications of nutrition, secretion, and innervation, superinduced by long-continued
irritation, disappear on the withdrawal of the cause,
and the natural functions become

restored.

We have

already stated that patches of abraded gastric mucous
membrane are renovated, as is often seen in the mouth
where portions of the same tissue are destroyed by
ulceration. But to what extent this process may be
carried, and whether it is adequate to the restoration
of the entire mucous lining of the stomach in cases
where such deficiency exists, is a question which, in the
present state of our knowledge, we are wholly unable
to determine.
*“ From the restoration of the functions of the stomach, however, we may infer, with a good degree of
probability, that the tissues have been also renovated.
Digestion, for example, cannot be carried on without
mucus ; healthy mucus cannot be secreted except from
healthy follicles, and there can be no follicles if the
mucous tissue, in which they are situated, is destroyed.
As this secretion, however, in such cases, is apparently
restored, we are led to infer that the tissue, whose func-

tion is to restore it, is also restored.
““ The Head. In nearly all instances the membranes
of the brain are much congested, as is also the scalp,

256

A VOICE

FROM

THE

with considerable effusion, under the arachnoid, while
the substance of the brain is preternaturally white and
firm. In some cases there is a much larger than the
natural quantity of serum found in the ventricles,
while in others the usual proportion exists. Dr. John
Percy, of Edinburgh, (Prize Essay, London, 1839,)
states that after poisoning dogs with alcohol he has
obtained it by distilling portions of the brain, and concludes from the fact that he obtained a larger quantity
of spirit from a certain weight of the cerebral mass
than from an equal weight of blood taken from other
parts of the body, that there is some peculiar affinity
between the brain and the spirit. He also obtained
alcohol by distilling portions of the urine, bile, and
liver.
The frequent occurrence of apoplexy, palsy,
epilepsy, hysteria, delirium tremens, madness, and
idiocy among drunkards demonstrate very clearly the
powerful influence of intoxicating liquors on the brain
and nervous system.

“ The Lungs. 'The lungs of intemperate subjects are
stated by some writers to be less liable to tubercular.
disease than those of temperate persons; but this does
not accord with our own observations. The free use
of alcoholic drinks is not only a powerful predisposing,.
but exciting, cause of phthisis; and such individuals
oftener succumb to pulmonary than to disease of any
other organ.
As alcohol is conveyed to the lungs
through the medium of the circulation as it escapes
through the exhalant vessels, it necessarily comes.

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

in contact with the delicate mucous membrane

257

of the

trachea bronchi and air cells, and, by the irritation it
there occasions, induces cough and labored respiration.
The membrane is thus constantly predisposed to inflammatory attacks, and the copious expectoration met
with in intemperate subjects indicates the phlogosed
and congested condition of the organ. That pulmonary consumption often originates in the use of intoxicating liquors, we believe is in accordance with the
experience of every practical pliysician. Dr. J. C.
Peters, CN. Y. Journal of Med., vol. iii., p. 335,) states
that where large quantities of spirits had been drank
just before death, the lungs were often found in a

state of splenization, appearing perfectly saturated
with dark blood, which soon changed to a florid red on
exposure to the air, except that which flowed from
the large severed blood vessels, this remaining thick,
dark, and tar-like. The parenchyma was heavy and
demi-solid to the feel, but softened so that the finger
could be easily forced through it. Dr. Francis remarks,
(Bacchus, p. 470,) that ‘the thoracic viscera suffer
excessively in many cases, and undergo great and permanent changes from intemperance.
In those of
strong predisposition to pulmonary mischief in habits
of a strumous or scrofulous nature, we find tubercular
formations and the several changes of disordered structure, the result of overwrought action or inflammation.
Sometimes the lungs may be freed from this oppressing
state by hemorrhage, and their texture be released for
a season; but the lessons thus induced are only the
29 *
mh

958

A VOICE

FROM

THE

precursors of ulcerative action in other subjects: the
previous tubercles secure this disastrous triumph by
purulent secretion and death.
It is surprising that
writers have not more generally adverted to the frequency of pulmonary consumption, as occasioned by
hard drinking. Dr. M’Lane assures me that he has
attended at least fifty cases of fatal consumption

of the

lungs brought on by intemperance.
‘“‘ The Heart, in Dr. Peters’ examinations,
was always
flabby, enlarged, dilated, but little or not at all thickened, and its external surface loaded with fat. Dark
fluid blood was often found in both ventricles in the.
aorta and pulmonary arteries. In addition to enlargement of the heart, we have often found an etheromatous, or ossified degeneration of the valves or the large
arteries, and, in some cases, hypertrophy of the organ.
“The Liver. There is no organ in the body so
liable to be affected by spirituous drinks as that of the
liver. In moderate drinkers it is usually somewhat
enlarged, softened, and, in frequent instances, has undergone the fatty degeneration to a greater or less extent. In old drunkards the enlargement is often very
ereat, reaching to ten or twelve pounds, the parenchyma being fat, soft, and fragile ; but in many cases it
is preternaturally diminished in size, of a pale straw
color, with very slight traces of blood vessels, and in a
hardened or indurated state. It is occasionally studded
with tubercles, which may be superficial or more or less

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

259

deeply seated in its texture, constituting what some
have called the hob-nail liver. Dr. Francis relates that
Mr. Fife, the anatomist, found the liver of a drunkard, in Edinburgh, to weigh fifty pounds. In some
cases its texture is granulated, and the peritoneal covering can generally be torn off with ease. The gallbladder is, for the most part, filled with bile.
“The spleen is usually larger than natural, and much
softened, though in some cases it retains its natural size.
‘“The omentum is loaded with a grayish-colored fat.
The kidneys are enlarged and flabby, their substance
often having undergone the granular degeneration or is
infilated in numerous spots with a whitish, fatty, or al-.
buminous matter.
Dr. Bright has called particular attention to the fact that the free use of alcoholic drinks
predisposes, in a powerful manner, to attacks of albuminaria. The bodies of drunkards pass rapidly into a
state of putrefaction.
** Pathology. That a portion of the alcoholic constituent of the intoxicating fluid is absorbed and carried
into the circulation, is proved by the odor of the expired
air, and by the physical properties of the fluid effused
within the head of persons who have died soon after
having taken spirits to excess; and it is probable, if the
urine were analyzed, that a considerable quantity would
be found to have passed off in this excretion. Deep
intoxication seems to be occasioned as follows: During
the general nervous and vascular excitement, consequent on the stimulus, increased determination to the

260

A VOICE

FROM

THE

head takes place, attended by excited vascular action,
which soon terminates in congestion, as the excitement
becomes exhausted, and gives rise to drowsiness, torpor, —
ox coma.
With this state of disorder, effusion of serum
takes place in the ventricles and between the membranes, heightening the torpor and coma.
When the
congestion or effusion amounts so high as to impede the
functions of the organs at the base of the encephalon
and of the respiratory nerves, respiration becomes infrequent and laborious, and consequently the changes
produced by it on the blood insufficiently performed.
In proportion as the blood is less perfectly changed in
the lungs, the circulation through them is retarded, and
the phenomena of asphyxia, congestion of the lungs,
right side of the heart, brain, and liver; the circulation
of the unarterialized blood, the imperfect evolution of
animal heat, and sedative effects upon the brain and
nervous system, generally follow in a more or less
marked degree, according to the quantity of intoxicating fluid which has been taken, and either gradually
disappear after some time, or increase until life is extinguished. These phenomena are heightened by cold,
which depresses the vital actions in the extremities and
surface to which it is applied, and increases the congestion of the above organs. The fatal consequence of
intoxication is often averted by the occurrence of vomiting, the stomach thereby relieving itself from a great
part of the poison, and the person recovering after some
hours of the above state of comatose intoxication. If
the intoxicating fluid has been thrown or drawn off

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

261

soon after its ingestion, the recovery of consciousness
is more immediate.
When intoxicating liquors are
taken frequently, and to an amount short of intoxication, the digestive canal and liver are the first to suffer
in their functions, and subsequently in their circulation
and organization; this being one of the most fruitful
sources of all the diseases, functional and organic, of
these viscera, as well of the nervous and vascular systems.

“The diagnosis of intoxication is not always easy. It
is difficult to distinguish it, in its more profound states,
from apoplexy or concussion of the brain, asphyxia,
and

the

extreme

effects

of cold.

The

odor

of the

breath is one of the best means of diagnosis, but is not
to be depended upon alone; for a person may be apoplectic, asphyxic, or exposed to severe cold, after
having taken only a small quantity of spirits; and
apoplexy, asphyxia, and the effects of cold often come
in aid of the intoxicating agent, and heighten its effects: apoplexy in those of a plethoric habit; asphyxia
from positions interrupting respiration, in addition to
the operation of the poison, as above explained ; and
cold in the manner already mentioned.
It will be very
difficult to distinguish those cases of intoxication, where
stertorous breathing is present, from apoplexy, unless
by the smell of the breath and of the matters thrown
off the stomach. It will readily be distinguished from
syncope, by the laborious, infrequent breathing, by the
smell of the breath, by the suffused eyes, and the livid,

tumid features.

262

A VOICE

FROM

THE

“The prognosis is unfavorable when the pulse is indistinct, or nearly gone from the wrist; when the
respiration is laborious, stertorous, or puffing; when
the countenance is pale or livid, and the pupils either
much dilated or much contracted, the coma profound
and the extremities cold.
Strabismus and tetanic
spasms are also very dangerous symptoms — the former
having been observed in three out of four fatal cases
recorded by Dr. Ogston. When these symptoms do
not appear, the ill effects pass off in a great measure
within twenty-four hours, although it is often much
longer before all the functions regain their healthy
tone.”
The following extract, in regard to the skin and its
function as it is affected by indulgence in alcoholic
drinks, we have taken from a work entitled Bacchus;
being a Prize Essay written by Ralph Barnes Grindrod,
Esq., a work of great merit and standard value.

‘“¢ The Skin and its Functions. WUabitual topers are
- commonly observed to be subject to cutaneous eruptions.
These vary, both in their nature and in their character.
A brief examination of the most prominent of these is
not only an important, but a necessary branch of our
inquiry.
“The Guttz Rosacea, or florid eruptions on the face,
and in particular on the nose, are too familiar and characteristic objects of attention to pass unnoticed by the
general reader. These are really ‘signals which Nature holds out and waves in token of internal dis-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

268

tress.’ They exhibit the fearful conflict of the physical powers with their mortal enemy, which has been
going on within, and are the safety valves which Nature
herself has formed for partial protection and relief.
Shakspeare denominates these marks of bacchanalian
indulgence, bubucles, whelks, and rosy drops; aud characterizes the unfortunate subject of them as ‘ the knight

of the burning lamp.’ Dr. Rush speaks of them by
the name of ‘rum-buds.’ They are produced, however,
by free indulgence in any of the strong kinds of alcoholic drinks. The appearance of the face differs according to the temperature and the stage at which the disease has arrived. It has been observed that in the
red-faced

drunkard

the

poison

acts

most

upon

the

surface, while in the pale-faced drunkard it preys upon
the vitals. Dr. Darwin in his Zodnomia speaks of these
eruptions as being sympathetic of disease of the liver.
Dr. Macnish thus animadverts on this point: ‘I have
remarked that drunkerds who have a foul, livid and
pimpled face, are less subject to liver complaint than
those who are free from such eruptions. In this case
the determination of blood to the surface of the body,
seems to prevent that fluid from being directed so forcibly to the viscera as it otherwise would be. The florid
nature of these erruptions is, no doubt, occasioned by
the chemical change which is effected by means of the
atmosphere on the otherwise dark and unhealthy blood
of drunkards.
*“Thé skin in drunkards differs much in its appearance. This characteristic is remarkably displayed in

264

A VOICE

FROM

THE

the beer and spirit drunkard.
Hogarth, in one of his
celebrated pictures, called Gin Lane and Ale Alley,
makes this distinction a point of considerable prominence.
The skin is subjected to a variety of disgusting
eruptions from the effects of alcoholic liquors. Dr.
Darwin speaks of one of these under the denomination
of Psora Ebriorum.
‘Elderly people,’ he remarks,
‘who have been much addicted to spirituous drinks,
as beer, wine, or alcohol, are liable to an eruption
all over their bodies, which is attended with very afflictive itching, and which they probably propagate from
one part of their bodies to the other with their nails
by scratching themselves.’ Dr. Macnish asserts that
he has met with several cases of the same disease. In
addition to these, there are some ulcerous affections
of the skin of a loathesome nature which have been
observed in persons of intemperate habits. Dr. Trotter,
when physician to the fleet under Lord Howe, had an
opportunity of witnessing an affection of this nature.
‘It was an ulcer,’ he remarks, ‘of the most malignant
kind on record, and in its character was directly opposite to the scorbutic ulcer. What was found a certain
cure for the sea scurvy, had no effect on this sore.
The least scratch on the skin, puncture of a lancet, a
blistered part, but especially scalds and burns, degenerated into this ulceration with a rapidity not to be
conceived. Large loss of muscular flesh from sloughs
and caries of bone was the consequence. An unusual

fetor attended this sore, beyond what even large’ sloughs
occasion.?

The same

characters, in a modified form,

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

269

will be found to attend all ulcerous affections with
which the intemperate are afflicted. ‘When drunkards,’ remarks Dr. Macnish, ‘ are affected with scrofula,
scurvy, or any cutaneous disease whatever, they always,
ceteris paribus, suffer more than any other people.’
‘In regard to the sleep of the drunkard, sometimes
deep and profound, at others restless and unquiet, the
excellent remarks of Dr. Macnish are strikingly to the
point. He says, ‘The drunkard seldom knows the delicious and refreshing slumbers of the temperate man. He
is restless, and tosses in bed for an hour or two before
falling asleep; even then his rest is not comfortable.
He awakes frequently during the night, and each time
his mouth is dry, his skin parched, and his head for the
most part painful and throbbing. These symptoms,
from the irritable state of his constitution, occur even
when he goes soberly to bed, but if he lie down heated
with liquor he feels them with double force. Most
persons who fall asleep in a state of intoxication have
much headache, exhaustion, and general fever on awakening. Some constitutions are lulled to rest by liquors,
and others rendered excessively restless—
but the first
are no gainers by the difference, as they suffer abundantly afterwards.
Phlegmatic drunkards drop into
slumber more readily than the others; their sleep is in
reality a sort of apoplectic stupor.’

“* Dreams. Dreams may be readily supposed to be
common from the deranged manifestations of the stomach and brain which occur in intoxication. They are
23

266

A VOICE

FROM

THE

usually of a painful nature, and leave a gloomy impression upon the mind. In general they are less palpable to the understanding than those which 6ccur in
soberness. They come like painful grotesque conceptions across the imagination ; and though this faculty
can embody nothing into shape, meaning, or consistence, it is haunted with melancholy ideas. These
visions depend much on the mental constitution of
the person, and are modified by his habitual tone of
thinking. It is, however, to be remarked, that while
the waking thoughts of the drunkard are full of
sprightly images, those of his sleep are usually tinged
with a shade of perplexing melancholy.

“« Nightmare. Drunkards are more afflicted than
any other people with this disorder, in so far as they
are equally subject to all the ordinary causes, and
liable to others from which sober people are exempt.
Intoxication is fertile in producing reveries and dreams
— those playthings of the fancy; and it may also give
rise to such a distortion of idea as to call up incubus
and all its frightful accompaniments.
** Sleep-walking.

Somnambulism is another affection

to which drunkards

are more liable than their neigh-

bors. I apprehend that the slumber is never profound
when it takes place, and that in- drunkenness in particular, it may occur in a state of very imperfect sleep.
Drunkards even, when consciousness is not quite abolished, frequently leave their beds and walk about the

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

267

room. They know perfectly well what they are about,
and recollect it afterwards; but if questioned, either at
the moment or at any future period, they are totally
unable to give any reason for their conduct. Sometimes after getting up they stand a little while and
endeavor to account for rising, then go again to bed
deliberately. There is often in the behavior of these
individuals a strange mixture of folly and rationality.
Persons half tipsy have been known to arise and go
out of doors in their night dress, being all the while
sensible of what they are doing and aware of its absurdity. The drunken somnambulism has not always
this character.
Sometimes the reflecting faculties are
so absorbed in slumber that the person has no consciousness of what he does. From drinking the affection is always more dangerous than from any other
cause, as the muscles have no longer their former
strength, and are unable to support the person in his
hazardous expeditions. if he gets upon a house-top
he does not balance himself properly ; from giddiness,
he is consequently liable to accidents of every kind.
It is considered, with justice, dangerous to awaken a
sleep-walker. In a drunken fit there is less risk than
under other circumstances, the mind being so far confused by intoxication as to be in some measure insensible to the shock.

“¢ Sleep-talking.

For the same reason that drunkards

are peculiarly prone to somnambulism, are they subject
to sleep-talking, which is merely a modification of the

268

A VOICE

FROM

THE

other. The imagination, being vehemently excited by
the drunken dream, embodies itself often in speech,
which, however, is in almost every case extremely incoherent, and wants the rationality sometimes possessed
by the conversation of sleep-talkers.”’

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

Soar

XY.

HR

269

«We'll follow the trail of the monster,
And trail him through forest and glen ;
We’ll hunt him wherever he hideth,
Then crush him to death in his den.
** Hath he not murdered our mothers,
And brought their gray locks to the tomb —
Hath he not murdered our brothers,

While yet in their manhood and bloom?”

In commenting upon the deleterious effects of alcoholic beverages, in their operations upon the nervous
system and the brain, in producing certain unnatural
results, such as delirium tremens, mania potu, and
all the other horrible diseases caused by excessive indulgence, together with their various modifications and
the different operations of alcoholic beverages in its
effects upon different individuals, classed by medical
men under different titles, such as mania potu, delirium ebriosum, oinomania, being an unnatural desire to
swallow immoderate quantities of spirits whenever they
can be obtained,—we have consulted and made full
and valuable extracts from the Prize Essay of Dr. William B. Carpenter, examiner in physiology in the University of London, and professor of medical jurisprudence in University College; an American edition of
23 *

270

A VOICE

FROM

THE

which work was published in the year 1851, by the
Massachusetts Temperance Society. In regard to the
effects of alcoholic stimulants upon the nervous system,
he says : —
‘From the peculiar tendency which alcohol in the
blood has to disorder the functions of the nervous sys-

tem, it might be expected that the habitual ingestion
of alcoholic liquors in excess would bring about a more
permanent derangement of this apparatus, and more
particularly of its encephalic portion, which seems to
be singled out by alcohol almost to the exclusion of the
spinal cord, just as the spinal cord is affected by
strychnine almost to the exclusion of the encephalon;
this we shall find to be the case. There are, in fact,
scarcely any diseases of the encephalon except such as
are of a purely constitutional nature, such as tubercular or cancerous affections, which are not so much more
frequent among the habitually sober as to justify us in
regarding this excessive use of alcoholic liquors as’
among the most efficacious of the conditions of their

production. It will be proper, therefore, to pass the
principal diseases in review before us, and to inquire
into the mode in which habitual excess in the use of
alcoholic drinks tends to produce each of them.
‘“‘ Delirium ebriosum,* considering that the state of
intoxication is itself, strictly speaking, a transient
paroxysm of insanity, it can excite no surprise that a
confirmed state of mental derangement should fre* Delirium ebriosum, drunken madness.

WASHINGTONIAN.

HOME.

Pee |

quently result from the repetition of the cause which
produces the single paroxysm.
‘There are, in fact, some individuals in whom a fit
of positive madness, persisting for some little time after
the immediate effects of the stimulus have subsided, is
brought on by excess in drinking. The head becomes
extremely hot, the face flushed, the pulse very frequent, full, and hard; the temper is excessively violent,
the individual sometimes attacking every one who
comes in his way, and, being always prone to ferocity
against any one who opposes him, and all sense of
danger being lost, he is not deterred from violence by
the fear of personal injury, but rushes madly upon
What may prove his destruction. This condition, the
delirium ebriosum of Darwin, is obviously an exagger-

ation of one of the ordinary forms of excitement in
common intoxication, and it usually subsides in a day
or two if the individual be simply restrained from
doing mischief to himself or others. It is sometimes accompanied, however, with tremors, even in the midst
of violent excitement; and this form constitutes the
transition to the disorder next to be noticed. The

frequent repetition of this paroxysm, of which, as of
ordinary drunkenness, the stimulating action of alcohol
on the mucous centres must be regarded as the immediate cause, is almost certain, like the recurrence
of regular maniacal paroxysms, to end in some settled
form of insanity.
“© Delirium

Tremens.

The habitual

drunkard, who

O72

A VOICE

has exhausted his nervous
excitement,

is liable

FROM

THE

power by continued

to another

form

of

over-

disordered

action of his brain, which is commonly known, from
one of its most marked symptoms,—the peculiar tremor
of the limbs, —as delirium tremens.
This state is, in
many respects, the opposite of the preceding. ‘There is
little or no heat of the head or flushing of the face;
the skin is cool and humid, and even chilly; the pulse,
though frequent, is small and weak, and the temper,
though very irritable, is not violent, the prominent disposition, indeed, being anxiety and apprehension of
injury or danger. There is almost entire want of
sleep; and even if repose be obtained, it is very imperfect, being interrupted by frightful dreams.
On the
other hand the waking state is frequently so disturbed
by illusions of a disagreeable or frightful nature, that it
differs but little from that of sleep, save in the partial
consciousness of external things. The following is the
vivid picture of this condition, given by one who has
himself experienced it: —
““¢ For three days I endured more agony than pen
could describe, even were it guided by the hand of a
Dante. Who can tell the horrors of that malady, aggravated as it is by the almost ever-abiding consciousness that it is self-wrought? Hideous faces appeared on
the walls, on the ceiling, and on the floors ; foul things _
crept along the bed-clothes, and glaring eyes peered —
into mine. I was at one time surrounded by millions
of monstrous spiders, who crawled slowly over every
limb, whilst beaded drops of perspiration would start

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

~

273

to my brow, and my limbs would shiver until the bed
rattled again. Strange lights would dance before my
eyes, and then suddenly the very blackness of darkness
would appall me by its dense gloom.
All at once,
whilst gazing at a frightful creation of my distempered
mind, I seemed struck with sudden blindness.
I knew
a candle was burning in the room, but I could not see
it, all was so pitchy dark. I lost the sense of feeling
too, for I endeavored to grasp my arm in one hand, but
consciousness was gone. I put my hand to my side,
my head, but felt nothing, and still I knew my limbs
and

frame

were

there;

and

then

the

scene

would

change. I was falling, falling swiftly as an arrow, far
down into some terrible abyss; and so like reality was
it, that as I fell I could see the rocky sides of the horrible shaft, where mocking, gibing, mowing, fiend-like
forms were perched ; and I could feel the air rushing
past me, making my hair stream out by the force of the
unwholesome blast.
Then the paroxysm sometimes
ceased for a few moments, and I would sink back on
my pallet, drenched with perspiration, utterly exhausted, and feeling a dreadful certainty of the renewal
of my torments.’
* With this disturbed condition of the brain a more
or less disordered state of the digestive apparatus is
commonly associated.
‘The tongue is furred, the stomach unable to bear food without vomiting or a sense of
oppression ; the bowels are usually constipated, or if

they be relaxed the stools are dark and offensive, and
the urine scanty.

Sometimes the disease proceeds to

274

A VOICE

FROM

THE

a fatal termination, which is generally preceded by contracted pupil, occasionally strabismus, incessant low
delirium, increase in the muscular tremor, almost
amounting to subsultus tendinum, and other indications
of nervous exhaustion. The pulse becomes thready,
and, at the same time, more rapid, so that it sometimes
can scarcely be counted ; cold sweats break out upon
the skin, and the chillness of the surface increases,
proceeding from the extremities of the trunk. Sometimes a calm supervenes shortly before death ; whilst in
other instances the patient is carried into a convulsion.
On the other hand the bad symptoms may gradually
abate, and the supervention of profound sleep give to
the exhausted energies of the nervous system the. means
of restoration. Sometimes, however, the recovery is
never complete, but the patient remains in a state of
melancholy, with more or less of deficiency of intellectual power, and this more especially happens after
repeated attacks of the disease. Between the delirium
ebriosum and the proper delirium tremens, there are
several intermediate conditions—the former, indeed,
being very apt to pass into the latter, if depleting
measures be imprudently adopted. The latter may
present itself, like the former, as the direct and immediate consequence of the excessive use of alcoholic
liquors; but there is this important difference—that
while the former is but an exalted manifestation of the
primary excitement ordinarily produced by alcohol, the
latter, supervening at the end of a prolonged debauch,
is the consequence of exhaustion produced by contin-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

215

ued excitement.
Delirium tremens more frequently
occurs, however, when the accustomed stimulus is
withheld ; and it is then no less obviously the result of
the previously exhausted condition of the nervous system, which nothing save the renewal of the potent
stimulus can excite to any thing like regular action.
In fact this terrible state is the manifestation of the
disordered condition to which the brain has been
brought by habitual excess, and plainly exhibits the
complete perversion of its functional power, and of its
nutritive operations. In fatal cases, no morbid appearances are found that in the least indicate turgescence
of the vessels or inflammatory excitement, unless the
delirium has partaken of the character of that which
directly arises out of intoxication. And it is manifest,
therefore, that the disordered condition must be in the
nervous pulp itself, and that it must be of a kind to
keep up morbid and irrelative activity at the same time
that the issue is incapable of experiencing those separative functions which are carried on in the healthy
condition during the state of repose.
“ Although, in the vast majority of cases, delirium
tremens is the immediate or the consecutive result of
the excessive use of alcoholic liquors, yet it may occur
independently of them; but its other causes are such
as resemble the excitement of alcohol in producing exhaustion or depression of the nervous power—such, for
instance, as excessive depletion, the shock of severe
injuries, or extreme cold. But in most of the cases in
which one or other of these appears to be its exciting

276

A VOICE

FROM

THE

cause, a predisposition has been established by habitual
intemperance, and this has been especially remarked of
the delirium traumaticum.
oo
‘“‘ It is important to remark that a slighter form of this
disorder, marked by tremors of the hands and feet, deficiency of nervous power, and occasional delusions,
will sometimes appear as a consequence of habitual
tippling, even without intoxication having been once
produced. And a still slighter manifestation of the
want of control over the muscular apparatus
— the
trembling of the hands in the execution of a voluntary
movement
— is familiar to every one as extremely frequent among the habitually intemperate. We thus see
that the disease is at least as much dependent upon the
disordered state of nutrition consequent upon the habitual presence of alcohol in the blood, as it is upon that
positive exhaustion of nervous power consequent upon
the violence of the excitement which is the more immediate effect of the stimulus.
‘* Insanity. Such being the case, we have no difficulty in understanding how the habitual use of alcoholic liquors in excess becomes one of the most frequent causes of insanity, properly so called, 7. e. of settled mental derangement.
Upon that point all writers
on the subject are agreed, however much they may
differ in their appreciation of the relative frequency of
this and of other causes. The proportion, in fact, will

vary according to the character of the population on
which the estimate has been formed, and also according

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

2TT

to the mode in which it has been made. Thus in pauper lunatic asylums, the proportion of those who have
become insane from intemperance is usually much
larger than it is in asylums for the reception of lunatics
from the higher classes, among whom intemperance is
less frequent, while causes of a purely moral and intellectual nature operate upon them with greater intensity. And again, if in all cases in which habitual intemperance has been practised, it be set down as the
cause of the mental disorder, the proportion becomes
much larger than it will be if (as happens in many
cases) some other cause has been in operation concurrently, and the disorder be set.down as. its result
— no:
notice whatever being taken of the habit of intemperance. This omission must be particularly allowed for
when the relative: proportion of intemperance: to: other
causes is: being estimated in regard: to: the middle and
higher classes, on: account: of the strong desire which
usually exists among the friends of the patient to conceal: the nature of his previous habits, and to lay his disorder entirely to. the account of the cause from which
it has seemed immediately to proceed. There can be
no' doubt that those who have weakened and disordered
the nutrition of the brain by habitual intemperance, are
far more liable than others to: be strongly affected by
those causes, moral or physical, to which the mental
derangement is more’ immediately attributable, so that
the habit of intemperance has contributed, as a _predisposing cause, at least as much towards its production as what is' commonly, termed the exciting cause
24

278

A VOICE

FROM

THE

has done. In fact, of predisposing causes generally, it
may be remarked that their action upon the system is
that of slowly and imperceptibly modifying its nutritive
operations so as to gradually alter the chemical, physical, and thereby the vital, properties of the fabric, and
thus to prepare it for being acted on by causes which iti
the healthy condition produce no influence.
And,
although that one of the conditions in previous operation is often singled out as the cause from which the
result may seem most directly to proceed, yet it frequently happens that it has really had a far smaller

share in the production of this disorder than those
remoter causes whose operation has: been more enduring and really more effectual.

~“ Otinomania. There is one form of insanity which
has so peculiar a relation to the use of aleoholic liquors
-as to call for particular consideration in this place;
and in order that its characters may be presented in
the most unexceptionable manner, the author avails
himself of the excellent account of the disease which
is given by Dr. Hutcheson in the report of the Glasgow Lunatic Asylum for 1842, deeming its value sufficient to justify him in presenting it without abridgment.
The designation ‘Oinomania,’ he would remark, has
been substituted by Dr. Hutcheson for the less appropriate term Dipsomania, used by other authors. ‘ This
form of mania,’ he observes, ‘is quite different from
drunkenness, which, however, may lead to it; the
diagnostic mark of the disease being the irresistible pro-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

279

pensity to swallow stimulants in enormous doses whenever and wherever they can be procured. There are
individuals who, at the festive board, invariably become
excited, if not intoxicated, but who are otherwise habitually sober, and in the course of the year drink much
less than others who never appear to be under the
influence of stimulants.
Others indulge in their potations in a regular manner, and daily consume a larger
quantity of liquor than is consistent with good health or
sobriety. All these, however, possess self-control, and
can at any time refrain from stimulants; but those
affected with the disease cannot

do so, however

con-

vinced they may be of the impropriety of yielding
to their propensity, or however desirous they may be
to subdue it. I repeat that the disease does not consist
in the mere act or habit of becoming intoxicated, but
in the irresistible impulse which drives the unhappy
being to do that which he knows to be pernicious and
wrong, and which, in the intervals of his paroxysms, he
views with loathing and disgust. He derives no pleasure from taste, for he gulps down the liquor of whatever kind it may be, or from society, for he generally
avoids society ; but he only derives a temporary satisfaction from the gratification of his insane impulse, or
rather from freeing himself from the overwhelming
misery which the non-gratification of his impulse inflicts
onhim.
The disease appears in three forms— the

acute, the periodic, and the chronic.
*<¢The acute is the rarest of the three. I have seen
it occur from hemorrhage in the puerperal state, in re-

280

A VOICE FROM

THE

covery from fevers, from excessive venereal indulgence,
and in some forms of dyspepsia. When it proceeds
from any of the first three causes, it is easily cured by
restoring the strength of the patient. When it arises
from the fourth cause mentioned, it is not so easily
removed, and is very apt to assume the chronic form.
‘¢<'The periodic or paroxysmal form is much more frequent than the acute. This is often observed in individuals who have suffered from injuries of the head,
females during pregnancy, at the catamenial periods, on
the approach of the critical period and afterwards, and
in men whose brains are overworked.
When it occurs
from injury of the head, the case is hopeless; in the
other instances it may be cured. In some cases it
occurs whenever the individual partakes of stimulant.

In these, total abstinence is the only remedy.

Like the

form about to be mentioned, it is frequently hereditary,
being derived from a parent predisposed to insanity, or
addicted to intemperance. In such cases the probabil-

ity of cure is very small.

The individual thus affected

abstains for weeks or months from all stimulants, and
frequently loathes them for the same period; but by
degrees he becomes uneasy, listless, and depressed;
feels ineapable of application and restless, and at last
begins to drink till he is intoxicated. He awakes from
a restless sleep, seeks again a repetition of the intoxicating dose, and continues the same course for a week
or longer. Then a state of apathy and depression follows, during which he feels a loathing for stimulants;

is the prey of remorse, and regrets bitterly his yield-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

281

ing to his malady. This is followed by fresh vigor,
diligent application to business, and a determined resolution never again to give way; but, alas! sooner or
later the paroxysm recurs, and the same scene is
reénacted, till ultimately, unless the disease be checked,
he falls a victim to the physical effects of intemperance,
becomes maniacal or imbecile, or affected with the form
of the disease next to be mentioned.
*¢¢ Of all the forms of oinomania, the most common
is the chronic. The causes of this are injuries of the
head, diseases of the heart, hereditary predisposition,
and intemperance; this is by far the most incurable
form of the malady. The patient is incessantly under
the most overwhelming desire for stimulants. He will
disregard every impediment, sacrifice comfort and
reputation, withstand the claims of affection, consign
his family to misery and disgrace, and deny himself
the common necessaries of life, to gratify his insane
propensity. In the morning, morose and fretfual, disgusted with himself, and dissatisfied with all around
him, weak and tremulous.
Incapable of any exertion,
either of mind or body, his first feeling is a desire for
stimulants, with every fresh dose of which he recovers
a certain degree of vigor, both of body and mind, till

he feels comparatively comfortable.
without

A few hours pass

the craving being so strong; but it soon re-

turns, and the patient drinks till intoxication is produced. Then succeed the restless sleep, the suffering,
the comparative tranquillity, the excitement, and the
state of insensibility; and unless absolutely secluded
24*

282

A VOICE

FROM

THE

from all the means of gratifying the propensity, the
patient continues the same course till he dies or becomes imbecile. This is that fearful state portrayed
by Charles Lamb, in which reason revisits the mind
only during the transient period of incipient intoxication,
‘‘¢Tt must be remarked that in all these forms of
the disease the patient is perfectly incapable of selfcontrol; that he is impelled by an irresistible impulse
to gratify his propensity ; that while the paroxysm is on
him he is regardless of his health, his life, and all that
can make life dear to him; that he is prone to dissipate
his property, and easily becomes the prey of the designing; and that in many cases he exhibits a propensity to
commit homicide or suicide. He is thus dangerous to
himself and others; and however responsible he may
have been for bringing the disease on himself, his
responsibility ceases as soon as he comes under the
influence of the malady. The disease, however, may
not be brought on by the act of the individual; and
then it is clear at once that neither directly or indirectly can he be responsible. But suppose that it were
the result of his previous conduct, I repeat, that however culpable he may have been for that, he is not a
responsible being while afflicted with the malady; for I
can see no distinction between this form of the disease
and any other which has been induced by the habits or
acts of the individual.
‘¢<¢The only chance of cure or alleviation is from
attention to the health and abstinence from intoxicating

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

283

liquors. Neither can be secured so long as the patient
is at large; and no amendment can be depended on
unless he has undergone a long course of discipline
and probation.
Considering, then, that the individual
is irresponsible and dangerous to himself and others,
that if left uncontrolled he will ruin his family, and
that this disease can be treated only in an asylum, it is
not only merciful to him and his relatives, but necessary for the security of the public, that he be deprived
of the liberty which he abuses and perverts, and that
he should be prevented from committing crimes instead
of being punished, or I should rather say being the
object of vindictive infliction after he has perpetrated
them. So convinced are some, affected with the periodical form of the disease, of the necessity of being controlled, that when the first symptoms of their paroxysm
are felt, they voluntarily enter an asylum, and remain
till the attack has passed off. These, however, are
men of stronger minds, though, with all their strength,
incapable of resisting the disease; and surely what
they feel to be their only refuge to avoid the impending
evil it cannot be unjust or harsh to foree on others
whose minds are more impaired.
Such cases soon
become rational in an asylum; and when the individual can so far control himself as voluntarily to surrender his liberty on the first premonitory symptoms of
the malady presenting themselves, he may be dismissed
after a shorter probation. It is otherwise with those
who have not that self-control, or who fancy that they
are unjustly interfered with when checked in their

284

‘A VOICE

FROM

THE

career. They require a much longer probation, which
should be increased at each return of their malady.
‘*¢Of the chronic form, 1 have seen only one case
completely cured, and that after a seclusion of two
years’ duration. In general, it is not cured; and no
sooner is the person liberated than he manifests all the
symptoms of the disease. Paradoxical though the statement may appear to be, such individuals are sane only
when confined in an asylum.
“¢The superintendent of the Dundee Asylum, in remarking upon the frequent causation of insanity by
intemperance, makes avery similar statement of the
results of his observations, and regrets that there are
not in this country such asylums as are understood to
exist in the United States for the reception of those
incorrigible drunkards in whom the power of self-control has been altogether destroyed by their repeated
yielding to the craving for alcoholic stimulants.’
*¢¢ But not alone upon the individual who gives way to
excessive indulgence in ardent spirits does the outraged laws of Nature retaliate, but the inheritance of
evil diseases through him or her who has thus given
uncontrolled license to their vitiated appetites to their
children and their children’s children, even to the third
and fourth generation. In speaking of the mental debility of the offspring of the drunkard, the learned
writer goes on to say, —
*¢¢ Tt is scarcely necessary to accumulate further proof
in support of the assertion, that, of all the single causes
of insanity, habitual intemperance is the most potent,

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

985

and that it aggravates the operation of other causes.
We have now to show that it has a special tendency to
produce idiocy, insanity, or mental debility in the offspring. Looking to the decided tendency to hereditary
predisposition in the ordinary forms of insanity ; looking also to the fact that any perverted or imperfect conditions of the nutritive functions established in the
parent are also liable to manifest themselves in the
offspring, as shown in the transmission of the gouty and °
tubercular diathesis,* we should expect to find that. the
offspring of habitual drunkards would share with those
of lunatics in the predisposition to insanity, and that
they would moreover be especially prone to intemperate
habits. That such is the case is within the knowledge
of all who have enjoyed extensive opportunities of observation, and the fact has come down to us sanctioned
by the experience of antiquity. Thus Plutarch says,
“One drunkard begets another;” and Aristotle remarks that “ drunken women bring forth children like
unto themselves.”
Dr. W. A. F. Brown, the resident
physician of the Crichton Lunatic Asylum, at Dumfries,
makes the following statements: “The drunkard not
only injures and enfeebles his own nervous system but
entails mental disease upon his family. His daughters
are nervous and hysterical, his sons are weak, wayward,
eccentric, and sink insane under the pressure of excitement of some unforeseen exigency, or of the ordinary
calls of duty. At present J have two patients who appear to inherit a tendency to unhealthy action of the
* Tubercular diathesis, scrofulous or consumptive condition of the body.

986

A VOICE

FROM

THE

brain from mothers addictedto drinking ; and another,
an idiot, whose father was a drunkard.”
The author
has learned from Dr. Hutcheson that the results of his
observations are precisely in accordance with the foregoing. On this point, however, the most striking fact
the writer has met with is contained in the Report on
Idiocy, lately made by Dr. Howe to the legislature of
Massachusetts.
The habits of the parents of three
hundred of the idiots were learned; and a hundred and
forty-five, or nearly one half, are reported as “‘ known
to be habitual drunkards.” Such parents, it is affirmed,
give a weak and lax constitution to their children, who
“are consequently “ deficient in bodily and vital energy,”’
and predisposed by their very organization to have
cravings for alcoholic stimulants; many of their children
are feeble and live irregularly. Having a lower vitality
they feel the want of some stimulation. If they pursue the course of their fathers, which they have more
temptation to follow and less power to avoid than the
children of the temperate, they add to their hereditary
weakness and increase the tendency to idiocy in their
constitution, and this they leave to their children after
them.
“¢¢ There is a prevalent impression that idiocy is particularly liable to occur in the offspring of a procreation
that has taken place when both of the parents were in
a state of intoxication. A. striking example of this
kind is related in the Phrenological Journal.
Both the
parents were healthy and intelligent, and one. at least
habitually sober, but both were partially intoxicated at

aPa’

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

287

the time of the intercourse, and the offspring was completely idiotic. There is every reason to believe that
the monomania of inebriety not only acts upon and
renders more deleterious whatever latent taint may
exist, but vitiates or impairs the sources of health for
several generations. That the effects of drunkenness
are highly inimical to a permanent healthy state of the
brain, is often proved at a great distance of time from
the course of intemperance, and long after the adoption
of regular habits.
*¢¢ Madness and idiocy are, in the present day, especially familiar and deplorable consequences of intemperate drinking. A fit of intoxication is in reality an
exhibition of temporary madness, followed, as it usually
is, by striking imbecility. -The diseases in question are
the result only of a similar and permanent action on
the brain and nervous system. Seneca wisely observed,
Ebrietas est voluntaria insanta.
*¢¢ The proportion of insane in Scotland was, some years
ago, nearly threefold to what it was in England.
From
a return made by the Scotch clergy in 1818, it appears
that the number of lunatics and idiots in that country
was four thousand six hundred and fifty, which, allowing for omissions, as some parishes made no returns,
the proportion at that time would be about two and a
half to every thousand of the population. In England
the highest estimate never exceeded one to twelve hundred. An accurate and valuable work published at
that period states that ‘‘the excessive and increasing
use of spirituous liquors among the lower ranks of the

288

A VOICE

FROM

THE

people is justly to be considered as the great cause of
this, as well as other diseases to which they are liable.’”
In Ireland, also, spirit drinking has been found to be
a most fearful source of madness:
Dr. Hallaran, who:

for' upwards. of twenty years: attended: one of the largest establishments in that country (Cork Hospital) for
the’ reception: of the lunatic: poor, thus remarks: ‘So
frequently do cases: of furious madness: present themselves, arising from long continued: ebriety, there is no
occasion to inquire the cause, the aspect of the: individual at first sight being’ sufficient to. expose its well. known
ravages.”
‘¢¢ In the minutes: of evidence appended to the report:
of the: committee: of: the: House of Commons on lunatic
poor in Ireland, the: increase of lunatics in. Ireland was
stated. and attributed to the hereditary nature of the
disease, and to:** the: increased: use of spirituous: liquors
which produces insanity.”
‘¢* By a statementof Dr. Crawford, in 1830,.it appears
that the following has been the result of an inquiry
recently made at the: Richmond Lunatic Asylum, Dublin. The number of patients then in confinement was.
two hundred and eighty-six, viz:, one: hundred: and’
twenty males and one hundred and sixty-six females;
of these: there are no less than one hundred and fifteen.
whose illness was known with perfect certainty, from
the acknowledgment of their relatives and friends, to.
haye been occasioned by the drinking of whiskey, fiftyeight of whom are males and fifty-seven females.
‘There is no doubt, whatever,’ remarks Dr. Craw-

ee ae
whe

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

289 .

ford, *‘ that a great many more might be added to the
same number, as is evident by the general appearance
of many and the character of their disease, although
positive information concerning their habits of life cannot always be obtained; the relatives being unwilling,
from a sense of shame, to admit that they were intem-

perate.”

They often indeed evince a singular degree of

moral perversion on that subject, confidently asserting
that the unfortunate sufferer was a model of temperance, when on closer inquiry it will frequently appear
that he was in the habit of taking a good many glasses
of whiskey in the day, although he never indulged so
far as to be unable to attend his work.’
_ “Jn England and Wales the same consequences are
found to follow habits of intemperance.
In a report
presented to Parliament a few years ago, and printed
by order of the House of Commons, it appears that the
pauper lunatics and idiots in the several counties of
England and Wales amounted to very nearly 10,000 in
number, 5145 of which were females.
By adding to
this number the amount of lunatics ascertained to be
confined in public and private asylums, and those in
the army and navy, it produced a total of 13,665,—a
mass which, according to Sir Andrew Halliday, is three
times greater than it was twenty years ago. Out of
495 patients admitted into a lunatic asylum in Liverpool, 257 were ascertained to have come to that state
through intemperance.
The report of the Middlesex
Lunatic Asylum at Hanwell, for 1834, states as follows : —
25

290

A VOICE

FROM

THE

“<The seventy-six deaths which have occurred in
the year have been
— with the exception of those who
died with advanced age —principally caused by disease of the brain and of the lungs, and the complaints brought on by those deadly potations of
ardent spirits in which the lower classes seem more
than ever to indulge. In a very great number of
men and women the insanity is caused entirely by
spirit-drinking.’
“Insanity does not prevail to so great an extent in
France as in the British nation. It appears from the
statement of Dr. Bayle, that between the 1st of January, 1815, and the 1st of January, 1823, there were
received into the Royal Hospital at Charenton 847 male
and 606 female lunatic patients. Of this number the
proportion of cases arising from intemperance was one
to fifteen among the men, and one to 140 among the
women.
The calculations, however, of Dr. Hallaran
show a widely different proportion, being one to three
among the men, and one to six among the women.

These included those cases alone the origin of which
could be accurately ascertained ; but supposing the entire number of patients in the asylum to be included in
the calculation, and that every case where the cause
could not be traced be placed on the list of those

which had not arisen from intemperance, the proportion would still be one to six among the men, and one
to twelve among the women
— that is, in relation to
France, more than double the number as regards the

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

291 -

male sex, and nearly twelve times the proportion as
respects females.
*‘The observations and experience of Dr. Esquirol
exhibit a still greater disparity. Out of the 836 patients submitted to his care, in the neighborhood of
Paris, he found three only whose insanity was attributable to excessive drinking; while according to Dr. Hallaran, at the Cork Lunatic Asylum, out of 383 male
patients 103 have been reduced to that melancholy
state from the effects of intemperance. The reports of
the Paris hospitals, however, do not make so large a
disproportion as in the cases above stated. Out of
2507 insane cases, which included the entire number
in the hospitals of Paris, 185 are stated to have become
so by drunkenness, or about one in thirteen and a half.
In Cork the cases were one in four where the causes
of the disease could be ascertained, and one in eight
on the entire.
:
“Tt has almost invariably been found that, in the
lunatic asylums in France and Italy, the female inmates
considerably preponderate over the males. This arises
of course from peculiar causes which need not more |
particular attention.
*¢ At the Cork asylum, however, the proportion of the
sexes was found to be nearly equal, while in other similar institutions in that country the males preponderate.
“Tt is inferred from these statements that some cause
of insanity was in operation among the male sex in
Ireland which did not exist in France and Italy. In

‘292

A VOICE

FROM

THE

America, also, intemperance has been found to be
equally productive of insanity.
Dr. Waters states,
that while he acted as house pupil and apothecary to the Pennsylvania hospital, the madness of
one third of the patients, confined by this terrible
disease, had been occasioned by the use of ardent
spirits.
“In the Second Annual Report of the Trustees of
the State Lunatic Asylum, Worcester, Mass., it is stated
_that in the year 1834 there were admitted 272 patients.
Out of more than forty different causes of insanity,
under which the number of the patients are affixed, are
extracted four of the highest proportions exactly as they
are published in the report. These are, intemperance,
- fifty-six; ill health, cighteen; fanaticism, thirteen; family troubles, eleven. Intemperance is thus seen to be
thrice more productive of insanity than the most prolific of all the other causes in the table in question.
It is known, moreover, to be the principal cause of 7
health and family troubles, together with many other
reasons generally stated in public documents as strong
inducements to mania.
It is more than probable
that great numbers of individuals are rendered insane who have in general borne a character of temperance and sobriety.
They drink freely, but not
to a state of visible intoxication.
The excitement
thus occasioned to the nervous system on some favorable opportunity ——and perhaps to the surprise of

friends and relations
—~breaks out into fierce and incurable insanity.”

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

293

How careful then should man be of indulging in, or
even tampering with, that pernicious destroyer, which
not only wrecks his own body but entails the direst
woe and misery upon his posterity. Yet it is a fact
beyond dispute. Take the robust and rosy-cheeked
country boy, born of temperate, healthy parents, and
contrast him with Young America, as seen in your
large cities of the Union, and what a difference!
The one, fresh from the green glades and his native
fields, is strong and able to push lustily on in the
great strife of life. No pampered appetite is his inheritance. He knows not the difference in the taste
of the vintage of 1812 or that of twenty years after.
His beverage has been the cold and sparkling, healthgiving water. He has drank it from the old spring
down in the meadow, where his father, and his father’s
father have in their boyhood drank before him. But
with his city brother how different!
His pampered
and vitiated taste and appetite demand delicacies and
costly viands. The daily habit of sipping wine at his
father’s fashionable and luxurious board has emaciated and destroyed his mental and physical energies; he grows up to man’s years, but not to man’s
physical or mental maturity. Can we wonder that
his offspring have degenerated since the days of their
grandfather? Is not the saying a true one, that one
bucket goes up while the other goes down? Is not
the ocular proof constantly before our eyes that
such is the fact? God made the country, man built
the city. Give me the green fields and the wild
71 Bog

294.

A VOICE

FROM

THE

wood where the stately stag loves to wander, and
the shady dell where the little child delights to
play; where the gurgling rill is music to the ear,
where man in solitude can praise the majesty of the

Eternal God!

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

CHAPTER

XII.

295

*<'Tis but a drop,’ the father said,
And gave it to his son ;
But little did he think a work
Of death was then begun.
The ‘ drop’ that lured him when the babe
Scarce lisped his father’s name,
Planted a fatal appetite
Deep in his infant frame.”

We

have thus far shown

-

to our readers the rise,

progress, and results, or, at least, some

of the results

of the operations and workings of the Washingtonian
Home.
From the time it first sprang into existence up
to the period of our closing this volume, we have
shown that hundreds of men, frail remnants of humanity, drifting about like wrecks upon the sea of Time,
have been rescued, cared for, and restored to the community, as bright examples of the beneficial workings
of that Home. The question has heretofore been asked,
and partially answered, How and by what strange mode
of treatment is all this good accomplished? We answer,
By kindness! by the observance of the principles of
love, truth, and fidelity! Love to our fallen and heartstricken brother; truth in portraying the evils of in-

296

A VOICE

FROM

THE

temperance, and fidelity to the laws of Nature and of
God. The views and sentiments of Dr. David M.
Reese, late professor of the Theory and Practice of
Physic, in the Albany Medical College, as declared by
him and put before the public in the year 1841, in a
small volume, entitled ‘“‘ A Plea for the Intemperate,”
are so excellent and exactly in point that the compiler
has in general adopted them, — he hopes with the sanction and approbation of the learned professor. ‘ The
treatment of the drunkard has, in almost all attempts
at his reform, been entirely and radically wrong; he
has been looked upon as an outcast and moral excrescence upon the face of the body politic. So, indeed, he
has, by his own wicked and sinful course, made himself.
But is not, in many cases, his offence looked upon in a
darker light than that of his still more sinful brother,.
who may be guilty of far greater crimes, and yet not
only escape unwhipped of justice, but be even smiled
upon and courted in society ?
‘¢ How often do we see instances in the community
where a man may be guilty of fraudulent insolvency or
defalcation in public office and escaping the law by a
quibble. He may laugh his creditors to scorn while
rolling in wealth and luxury upon his ill-gotten gains.
He may possess himself of plunder from helpless
widows and orphans by extortion and dishonesty, and
thus grinding the faces of the poor that he may revel in
the fruits of his robberies. He may even enter the
domestic circle of his neighbor or his friend, and destroy
the peace of a happy family by making the wife and

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

297

mother the victim of his arts; or he may crush that
mother’s soul by robbing her of her daughter, whose
youth and loveliness have prompted his unhallowed
passion, until innocence and beauty have become his
prey. Or, he may call out into the ‘field of honor’
the husband or the brother whom he has thus wronged
and stung to madness, and consummate his deed of
infamy by murdering his victim. Ay, he may do all
this, and more —‘ enough to make the cheek of darkness pale.” And if his wealth has given impunity to
his crimes, they may all be known, and yet if he escape
a felon’s fate and seem a gentleman, no mark of Cain
upon his brow will exclude him from the ‘best society
among the circles of gayety and fashion; nor will he
fail to be courted and caressed while he can make a
figure in the world, and ‘smile and smile, and be a villain still.’
‘¢ But when once a man has become publicly known
as a drunkard, he is at once exiled from the home of
his youth and the house of his friends. His companions in the associations which made him what he is, and
by whom his moderate drinking had ‘been encouraged
by example until he fell by the snare they had laid both
for themselves and him, and by which they are still en-

tangled
— these all avoid and disown him as ‘a fellow
not fit to live.’ If they speak of him in his absence, it
is as one lost utterly beyond recovery —as forever lost.
Or even if among his former friends there be any semblance of commiseration over his unhappy fate, while
they express their emotions of pity, or even find it in

|

298

A VOICE

FROM

THE

their hearts to make prayer in his behalf, both the one
and the other are accompanied with all unbelief, and
despair in his case is universally felt and expressed. A
brother’s and a sister’s love, a father’s paternal regard,
a mother’s compassion, and even a wife’s deep fountain
of affection, are, alas! too often sealed ; and towards the
hapless wanderer all, all are ‘ without natural affection,’
and his name is seldom mentioned but with a feeling
allied to execration.
“Tf he is met in the street or in public places after he
has become known as a drunkard, even his own familiar
friend will pass him without a look of recognition; and,
possibly, not content with thus slighting him, will even
outrage his forlorn condition by a visible expression of

scorn or derision; and his immediate relatives, if they
speak to him at all, do so in terms of rebuke and contempt, perhaps accompanied by upbraiding and reproachful epithets. They look upon him as an outlaw
from all the ties of kindred
—a living pestilence, for
whom there is no hope. Not only is he shut out from
all the redeeming influences of the domestic circle, but
his company, even his presence, is shunned, nor is any
effort to reclaim or restore him prompted either by
_ paternal, filial, fraternal, or even conjugal love. Thus
abandoned by all, and constrained to feel the unutterable anguish of his cruel exile, he becomes given

up to self-abandonment, and exclaims, in the desolation
of his spirit, ‘ No one cares for my soul.’ The last ray
of light and hope is thus, alas! too often extinguished;

and the hapless exile, now

only the sad remnant of

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

299

what he was, regarding himself doomed to infamy and
execration, soon yields to his destiny, and his immortal
spirit is ingulfed in the whirlpool of perdition. Such
is the melancholy picture of human woe, which sober
truth constrains us to portray as existing in multiplied
thousands under the eye of a civilized and Christian
population, and prototypes of which may be found in
every city and town in the United States. And in look‘ing around, these victims of intemperance thus driven
to self-abandonment by ‘man’s inhumanity to man,’ we
may see among them fathers, husbands, brothers, sons,
many of whom were once among ‘ Nature’s noblemen ’
in birth, in education, in real worth, in every attribute
which dignifies manhood; and even now, if reclaimed,
capable of adorning the domestic circle, being a blessing to society, and conferring signal benefits upon the
world. But, in an evil hour, they have learned to love
the social glass, perhaps amid the scenes of their childhood’s home; the poisoned chalice having been put to
their lips in the circle of those loved ones whose ties of
kindred and affection could alone have seduced them
into this sad error, by which they have fallen into the
snare of the destroyer. By reason of a physical necessity, a little has demanded a little more; occasional
drinking has, by the laws of the physical being, insensibly become habitual drinking, until this demon has put
out their eyes, closed their ears, hardened their hearts,
poisoned their brains, and is hurrying them on to a life
of desperation and a grave of infamy. Multitudes of
such are even now perishing, and this without one kind

300

A VOICE

FROM

THE

hand stretched out for their rescue, with scarcely a
prayer breathed for their deliverance, or one tear being
shed over their dishonored graves.
“* May we not, then, hope to gain the public ear,
while in behalf of these degraded outcasts from the
sympathies of our common nature, we here record our
plea; and shall we not find a response in the bosom of
every man or woman who has a heart ‘ to feel another’s
woes’? It is not for Intemperance we plead, but for
its miserable victims. In the name of God and humanity we invoke, in behalf of the poor drunkard, a
share of that sympathy and of those kind offices to
which, by the laws of God and Nature, his very manhood entitles him, and to which his wretchedness gives
him an irresistible claim. By all the endearing ties
of kindred we would commend our appeal to parents,
wives, sisters, brothers, in behalf of their drunken relatives; and implore that, however degraded by crime,
and whatever disgrace those crimes may have inflicted,
such be not driven to selfabandonment for want of
those soft words and kind looks which, though they cost
nothing, are beyond all price to those children of misfortune in the hour of their extremity.
“It is a little thing to speak a phrase
Of common comfort, which by daily use
Has almost lost its sense; yet on the ear
Of him who thought to die unmourned ’twill fall
Like choicest music.”

“¢ Occasional drinking becomes

habitual drinking— _

by a physical necessity, intemperate

drinking.

The

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

301

cause of drunkenness, then, — and the only cause, — is
not intemperate or excessive drinking; for this is but
the physical effect of the temperate, and moderate, and
occasional use of intoxicating drinks. No man ever
did or can drink in excessive quantities until he has

previously learned to drink moderately ; nor was there
ever an individual who began the use of intoxicating
liquors with the design, or even consent, to become a
drunkard.
Men are overtaken by drunkenness for the
first time while they are occasional,and moderate
drinkers in their own estimation and that of others.
Indeed the conscious delirium produced by the first
excess is discerned by themselves with a thrill of horror
arising from that thought now brought home to them,

that they have insensibly committed an excess while
they are sure they only meant to drink moderately.
_ They console themselves by the reflection that they have
only taken a little too much, and resolve to be more
guarded in future, and persist in moderate drinking.
Alas! their fatal error is in attributing the mischief to
their having committed an excess, instead of discovering that their moderate use is the source of this excess,
and that the latter must succeed the former as certainly
as an effect follows its cause.
** In view of the physical disease which, we claim, exists in every case of habitual drunkenness, and which
the foregoing statements are designed to corroborate,

we would argue the policy and duty of extending to all

such the kind attentions to which the helpless, the unfortunate, and the afflicted are entitled.
26

Before our

302

A VOICE

FROM

THE

fellow-men had fallen into the ditch of darkness, and
while moderate drinking had not yet done its work by
poisoning the sources of life, he might have rescued
himself by well-directed efforts. But now the Rubicon
has been passed, self-extrication is no longer possible.
Unless he is aided by some extraneous agency, the
wretched victim of strong drink, now that his monomania is developed, lives and dies without hope.
Alas! how often is this sad catastrophe precipitately
hastened by the slight, contempt, scorn, and abandonment with which he is treated, and this often by those
‘of his own household.’
It is no valid objection to
our plea to allege that his present monomania is the
result of crime —of habits of moderate drinking voluntarily indulged in defiance of entreaty and warning.
All this and more may be true, and yet the stronger is
his present claim to the sympathies of humanity, now
that he has been overtaken by the sad penalty of his
folly and sin, enduring, as he is, the severity of unutterable calamity.
‘“¢ When a fellow-being is drowning, shall we pause to |
inquire whether he voluntarily entered the water, or fell
into it by accident? or whether he was drunk at the
time, or in the act of some greater offence? Or rather
shall we not stretch out our hand and rescue him first,
and speculate afterwards?
These monomaniacs for
whom we plead are perishing by a more fearful death;
nor can we be deterred from imploring the interposition of the hand of kindness by any upbraiding reference to tlieir former crimes. Nor can it be any bar

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

303

against our plea to insist that the drunkard has been, or
is now, a sinner. We should never forget the rebuke
of the Holy One of Israel to a multitude clamoring for
the blood of a notorious sinner, and invoking swift
vengeance upon her guilty head: ‘ Let him that is without sin cast the first stone.’
“Nor should it for a moment be supposed that the
case of any drunkard is incurable ; for he is not, unless
he is made so by being cast off from the sympathies
of human kind, nor should he ever be abandoned
while he continues to live. If his Maker does not suffer
him to be cut off even during his insane attempts at
self-destruction, it is because there is yet hope in his
case. True, he may have given himself up for lost;
and although ‘suicide, like a mighty incubus, may sit
enthroned upon his soul,’ still he should be made to feel
that he has friends who have not ceased to pray, and
labor, and hope for his repentance and recovery. Instead of being treated as an outcast from the offices of
humanity he should be soothed, restrained, and protected. He should be assured that we compassionate
his waywardness; that we are not willing to give him
up; that we yet have hope for his rescue; and during
his brief intervals of sobriety he should meet with
nought but the sympathies of humankind for perishing
manhood.
To upbraid him now with his past sins is
consummate cruelty ; to deal censoriously with him for
his present drunken habits is abominable injustice and
wrong.
“The prevalent creed that drunkenness is always

304

A VOICE FROM THE

a crime and never a misfortune, has led to tne prevalent practice of abandoning such as are utterly beyond
recovery from perdition; and those who adopt this
creed never put forth an effort to save the drunkard
from such a destiny. These may regard our plea as
mere sentimentalism, and any scheme for rescuing such
as Utopian and visionary; but we, who have embraced
a different creed and pursued corresponding practice,
are prepared to testify that we have seen and are emboldened by the results of our experience and our
observation. We would fain reach every drunkard in
the land with the assurance that there is still room to
hope in his case; for instances are numerous in which
young men have been rescued from this monomania by
the persevering efforts of a mother, a sister, or a wife,
when all else had cast the helpless wanderer off, and
woman’s love had prompted this deed of compassion,
‘hoping even against hope.’ In such examples of the
triumphs of these ‘ angels of mercy,’ the moral suasion
of persevering kindness has been aided by no physical
means other than the restraints of total abstinence imposed kindly, but firmly, until. the desire for strong
drink had become extinguished by time and the persevering tenderness of woman’s love. But it is freely
conceded that this disease often reaches a point When
such effects, however well directed, will be inadequate
to restore the fallen victim of intemperance, and hence
there is still an imperative call for the establishment of
such

an institution

as the Washingtonian

public policy will not prompt

Home.

this measure,

If

private

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

305

philanthrophy should combine to secure it; and they
who will furnish the world with examples of such institutions of benevolence will be the benefactors of their
race ; and while the wise and good on earth will honor
them they will receive the approving smile of Heaven,
and the grateful homage of posterity.
.
“If such institutions were provided and conducted
on the principles of pure universal bevevolence, the
voluntary subjects of their restraints would be sufficiently numerous to commend their importance and
utility to every lover of his species.
Their motto
should be that of Oliver Goldsmith, ‘True merit consists not in a man’s never falling, but in rising as often
as he falls.” We are in appearance and reality as far
as possible removed from the semblance of a prison.
It is publicly avowed that the victims of intemperance
are here regarded and treated as objects of pity, as well
as blame, of commiseration as well as censure.
Our
doors are thrown open to receive all who, despairing of
self-extrication from the snare of the destroyer, are willing to be aided and assisted by the restraints and discipline of a house from which streng drink is excluded.
Their treatment is kind and gentle, such as that extended to invalids, and they are made to feel that they
are here regarded not as criminals but as diseased persons, for whom both medical and moral treatment is
required; nor is any upbraiding reference to the past
allowed. And until the evidence is conclusive that
the desire for strong drink, which is the last symptom
26 *

306

A VOICE

FROM

THE

of their disease, has been removed, they are regarded
and reported only as convalestean but on no account
dismissed as cured.
‘¢ How strikingly does the object of compassion, mentioned in Holy Writ, resemble the poor drunken monomaniac. He fell ‘among thieves, who stripped him of
his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving
him nearly dead.
Need we seek an analogy between
these ‘thieves,’ and the fraternity who make gain of
the ‘ wages of unrighteousness,’ by making or selling the
drunkard’s

drink?

Is it not found in the conduct of

both? When aman has fallen among them, is he not
‘stripped of his raiment,’ if he be poor and have
nought beside? Do they not ‘wound’ his peace, his
health, his character, his family, his body, and his soul,
and then ‘depart, leaving him nearly dead’? Would
he not perish in this hapless state if the world was
filled only with priests and Levites, all ‘ passing on the
other side’ to shun the wretched remnant of humanity
because he has ‘fallen among thieves’ ?
‘‘ But now see the good Samaritan; and while we
learn the history of his benevolence, let us attend to
the voice of Him, who concludes the narrative with those
remarkable words ‘Go thou and do likewise.’
The
love of kindness dwelt in his heart and home. ‘ When

he saw him he had compassion on him,’ and it was
“precisely the compassion with which we should be inspired when we see a drunkard. But his pity expended
not itself in emotions or words, for ‘he went to him,’
that he might be a friend indeed; and thus we too

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

307

should go to the poor drunkard, though lying on the
ground, or even ‘crawled into a sty, and almost bristled into a swine,’ still we should go tohim. His wounds
may be healed by pouring into his ears and his heart
the oil and wine of human sympathy, in tones to which
he has long been a stranger, for he still lives, and ‘ while
there is life there is hope.’ So thought this Samaritan,
and hence he walked that this poor sufferer might ride
on his beast. ‘He brought him to the inn, and took
care of him,’ becoming himself his nurse for the night;
and on the morrow he paid his expenses, and provided
for all the charges which might attend his recovery.
Such were the acts which were denominated ‘ showing
mercy,’ and given to illustrate the love to our neighbor,
which is the duty of usall.
He who would imitate this
true philanthropist, and share the blessing he enjoyed,
must ‘go and do likewise,’ even to the poor drunkard.
And so admirably adapted is the conduct of the good
Samaritan, here detailed, to the case of the intemperate,
that a more enlightened course could not be advised or

pursued.

|

‘Was the man who fell among thieves poor, stripped,
wounded, and left nearly dead ?—so is the drunkard.
Was his condition one which appealed for commiseration in view of his helplessness ? — the drunkard is in
a condition equally helpless. Would this man have
perished but for the interposition of the Samaritan’s
kind offices ? — so will the poor drunkard perish by the
more awful death, if you ‘pass by on the other side,
and leave him to his fate, as do ‘ priests and Levites,

308

A VOICE FROM THE

and too often lovers, friends, and kindred. Then we
should have compassion on him, and give no place to
any other emotion.
We should ‘go to him down into
the pit, or enter the dark dungeons of his despair in
pursuit of him, for he has neither the desire nor the
ability, neither the will nor the power, to come to us.
Had the Samaritan waited till the poor man sought and
solicited his kind offices, he could not have ‘ gone to
him,’ as we learn he did, and this because he was a
man, ‘a neighbor,’ who was lying nearly dead, unable —
even to cry for help.
But he did more; for, dismounting from his beast, he placed the poor man in
his stead, and, leading the animal, himself being on
foot, he brought him to the inn; and then, at whatever
inconvenience to himself, he suspended his journey
and became himself his kind and affectionate nurse,
spending the night in watching by his bedside after
pouring oil and wine into his wounds, and thus soothing and healing the poor invalid by the best attentions
which he could bestow. Nor did he then deem his
duty performed until he had contributed from his
purse sufficient for his present relief, and provided for
all necessary care and nursing until he should recover.
In behalf of the poor drunkard we bespeak sie
similar treatment.
“We advise, then, that every habitual drunkard be
regarded as a monomaniac, and that he be treated as
an insane man, both in law and in fact, according to
the humane and enlightened principles which prevail
at this day in the department of medical ethics and

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

309

jurisprudence. Let him receive nothing but kindness
and sympathy, both in public and in private, until
he shall be made to feel that while he is blamed for his
former vices his condition is commiserated by all. In
sober and lucid intervals let some one gain his confidence by unequivocal proofs of affection for him as a
fellow-being, and by similar proofs of a sincere desire
_ tobe his friend. Reason with him at such intervals
and you will find him accessible, especially if you convince him that amidst the wreck of friends, which he
has consciously suffered, there is one who still survives,
whose heart throbs with emotions of human sympathy,
and who still cares for his soul.
“ Having secured his confidence, you may now tell
him, in all faithfulness, but still in tones of kindness,
that he is destroying his health, blasting his character,
murdering his wife, or bringing in.sorrow to the grave
his gray-haired parents, beggaring his children, dishonoring his species, and ruining his soul. Tell him all
this and more, if more be needed to reach his conscience, and if told in the spirit of kindness he will
hear you patiently, and he will frankly confess it all.
** But now he will put in his plea of extenuation, and

allege that ‘he cannot help it; that he has made the
effort again and again; that he has sincerely, honestly,
and faithfully tried to abandon his destructive habit,
but he cannot help it.’ And he tells you truly, — nor
need we envy the head or heart of him who doubts
it, —‘ Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard

his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accus-

310

3

A VOICE

FROM

THE

tomed to do evil.’ In his own strength, by the exertion
of any power he now possesses, with all that is left to
him of moral agency and volition, it is true that ‘ he
cannot help it;’ and if unaided by human instrumentality, he must perish; for even God works by means,
and man with man in his appointed agency. Instead
of denying or doubting the truth that he cannot help
it, you are to believe and acknowledge that it is even _
so; and now you will convince him that you understand
his case, and do him justice; and now you have
reached the point at which you may successfully interpose your kind offices by proposing to help him to
do what he cannot do for himself. You may now propose your plan; for you have intrenched yourself in
his heart, and henceforth you may lead him with the
docility of a child.
‘“‘ Having, by persevering acts of kindness, gained
possession of the recesses of the heart, you may cautiously begin to make advances towards his head, still
bearing in mind that you have in charge a frail child of
mortality, upon whom disease in its most horrid form
has done its work. While your rigid discipline of total
abstinence is enforced, you may express your wish, and
urge the importance of his compliance by making an
effort for his own recovery, now that the way is clear
and you are at hand to hold him up and assist him at
every step. Without such a friend, his promise, his
pledge, or his oath would be mere ropes of sand, however honestly given, and however sincerely impelled by
the best motives; but with such a friend and such a

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

311

discipline, you may encourage him to form a resolution

to express it and to record it, seeing that he now must
be convinced that the possibility of his reformation de_pends upon his entire and perpetual abstinence from
all intoxicating drinks during the remainder of his life.
But in order to attain success, it is essential that he be

convinced that his vow must be made religiously in
self-distrust, but in sure dependence on Divine assistance. You may remind him that when there is help
nowhere else, there is help in God, and that ‘earth
knows no sorrows that Heaven cannot heal;’ and by
these and like means you may prepare him to give you
some proof of his sincerity to forever abandon the inebriating cup. ‘This can be done by inducing him to
become a member of the Order of the Sons of Temperance, or some other association of that kind, pledged to
the principles of total abstinence, and thereby surrounding him with individuals and associations that are
constantly bringing before his eyes the miseries of the
past and anticipations of the future. Then you have
acquired a degree of control over his future course
which nothing else could secure, and you have imparted
to him a degree of power for self-government to which
he has long been a stranger. A new association of
ideas takes place in his mind, and a moral revolution
is consciously felt when this deed is done; so that his
association with an organization of temperance men is
ever present in his thoughts.
But now he must be
soothed, comforted, and encouraged; he must be welcomed to the society of those friends who will not mock

312

A VOICE

FROM

THE

his infirmity by using intoxicating drink in his presence. The past must be buried in everlasting forgetfulness, no allusion being made to it by word or deed.
Let him be treated precisely as though he’had never
fallen, and soon your reclaimed neighbor will feel that
he is himself again, and show you that he is a man.
His parents, if they still linger on earth, will rejoice
that ‘he was dead, and is alive again,’ and, like the
man in the Gospel, their joy will be greater over
this lost one found, than over all those of their children who have never thus strayed. Has he a wife and
children upon whom his past conduct has inflicted unutterable wrong, and to whom he was about to bequeath the legacy of beggary and shame as their only
inheritance?
That little family, now rescued from
such a destiny, will exhibit a revolution greater than
that which is described in fabled story as the transformation by the magician’s wand.
And he himself, who
was but lately a moving pestilence, abhorred of man,
- accursed of God, and on the verge of perdition, is now
a man,

a gentleman,

and often becomes

a Christian,

as the legitimate result of the reformation in his opinions and habits, which this step has occasioned.

‘We are prepared here to record our deliberate persuasion that there is good ground of hope for every
drunkard in the land, if each of them can have one
friend who is willing to admit our plea and act accord-

ingly, by devoting himself or herself to the work of:
his rescue in the spirit of kindness, faithfulness, and
self-sacrifice, for which we plead. Nor do we believe

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

—

os

that there is any foundation for hope in the case of any
drunkard in this nation, unless some one philanthropist can be found who is willing to devote himself to the
labor of love.
“‘ We have seen that in the case of the habitual
drunkard, who has passed the Rubicon, for himself
extrication is a physical impossibility. The laws of
his being must be miraculously suspended if left to
himself, or he will drink till he dies. It is most true
that Divine influence would not be withheld if sought
by him even when his excesses have led his fellow-man
to deny him all mercy and consign him to despair and
ruin. But we have seen that the poor drunkard has
become disabled and disqualified from availing himself
of the provisions of almighty Goodness, and is constrained to reply to the inquiry, ‘ Understandest thou ?’
as did the Ethiopian to Philip, ‘ How can I, except
that some man guide me?’
Indeed it is included in

the divinely-appointed scheme for the recovery of man
from any species of depravity or sin, that human agency
shall be employed as the means or instrumentality in
the accomplishment of the work in every individual
ease. And in the instance of every drunkard we may
find at once the proof and illustration of this feature
in the divine economy.
** And can it be that in a Christian nation there are
more drunkards than Christians? Or if this question
be answered in the negative, as it must be in candor
and truth, we may be permitted to ask another: Are
there not numerous drunkards, notoriously such, for
27

314

‘

4§ VOICE

FROM

THE

whom, during a series of years, no Christian has been
found, even among his relatives, to make a business of
reclaiming.
him by devoting himself to the work?
Are
there not drunkards by thousands who have never received aught, even from Christians, other than unsparing rebuke, censure, and reproach, instead of the kind,

affectionate tenderness which Christianity inspires?
And may we not say to such Christians, ‘Thou art
verily guilty of thy brother’s blood?’
While we write
at this hour, and while the reader may pause over this
page, drunkards are perishing in our neighborhood, for
whose rescue and salvation no single effort of kindly
affection has been put forth, into whose ears no voice
of commiseration has ever uttered a word of sympathy,
and whose hearts have never been moved by the inspiration of hope since they fell into the snare of the destroyer.
‘‘ By common

consent they have been given up to
their own way ; and, Cain-like, we have responded to
the inquiry concerning our brother, ‘Am I my brother’s keeper?’ We may not, like him, have directly
inflicted the blow which shed our brother’s blood.
But we may, nevertheless, be ‘ verily guilty’ by allowing him to perish before our eyes without an effort,
when it was in our power to save him. ‘ Ye knew your
duty and ye did it not.’
‘‘ There is a chord which yet vibrates in the heart
even of the drunken monomaniac.
That chord may
be touched by the love of kindness, and by this alone.
It is for lack of this instrumentality that such multi-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

815

tudes are perishing, and will continue to perish. Nor
will this love of kindness be either felt or exhibited
until there shall be inspired into the public creed and
practice the just and enlightened views for which we are
pleading, in relation to the claims which such have
upon the commiseration of their species. Multitudes
of them are openly ‘ more sinned against than sinning,’
and are incurring less guilt by their present vice than
is merited by those who so cruelly abandon them to
their fate.

Indeed, the poor drunkard is often despised,

discarded, and anathematized by men
than he, who are base enough to

morally worse

‘Compound for sins they have amind to
By damning those they’re not inclined to.’

And we are often condemned to listen to unsparing
epithets and reproach upon the poor fallen drunkard,
uttered from the lips of men who neither fear God
nor regard man, and whose violations of the whole
decalogue are so flagrant that if their own crimes were
written in their foreheads they would be driven into
exile by the execration of their fellow-men.
But even
this is trifling compared with the conduct

of some

pro-

fessed Christians who treat their neighbors, relatives,
and even their children, after they have fallen into
drunkenness, with nought but bitter denunciation and
censoriousness, regarding them as unworthy the interposition of God or man for their restoration; as alike
beyond

next.

the reach of hope, either in this world

or the

316

A VOICE

FROM

THE

‘* But who can doubt that such a reformation will
bring its subjects under the influence of the instrumentalities of our holy religion, from which their former associations and habits almost excluded them. Indeed, the facts have already shown this desirable result;
and instances are known in which already the physical
and moral revolution which has been consequent upon
their recovery from drunkenness has been followed by a
self-consecration to the services, obligations, and duties
of personal religion.
“Could we look into the domestic circle of some such,
who are known thus to have been converted to Christianity, we could better appreciate the mighty change.
A few short months since we might have beheld the
haggard visage, the sunken and tearless eye, the pale
face and withered form of a broken-hearted wife, driven
to an obscure garret with her children, clothed in rags,
and sharing together the morsel of bread which, with
enfeebled and exhausted frame, she was able to earn by
her daily and nightly toil; her husband, meanwhile,
expending the fruits of his labors in the company of
the revelling and drunken, and either absent the live-

long night or returning in a state of frenzy to add to
her sufferings the cruelty of his abuse, and wring her
heart by some new outrage on her person or her little
ones.
|
‘¢ But now how changed the scene! That domestic

circle might be seen gathered around the family altar,
of which the restored husband and father is the officiating priest; and while their grateful homage is paid to

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

Sia

‘Our Father which art in heaven,’ all around is health
and contentment, peace and plenty. Such are the
fruitsof the reformation of the intemperate, such the
workings of the Washingtonian Home, and such would
be the happy result we*might often witness if the
course of conduct for which we plead were pursued
towards our drunken neighbors.
** But, alas, such is not the treatment of the victim
of intemperance which can be expected, until the public estimate of such shall be revolutionized, and the
idea of their hopelessness no longer finds a place in the
public creed. They are shunned and avoided as though,
like the sufferers by the ancient leprosy, or the more
modern plague, their presence was contagion, and their
very touch, death. Like such they are deemed incurable by human means, and either shut up in perpetual
exclusion from society and home to perish by neglect, or
driven into exile from all redeeming associations; are
turned out into the fields to die with as little sympathy
as a worn-out horse or superannuated beast of burden,
and with as little hope as is indulged towards these
- inferior animals.

“* But we plead in their behalf, that they are men;
fallen men, it is true, degraded men, physically and
morally diseased, but not invariably so. There is yet
‘balm in Gilead and a Physician there.’ Like the bitten Israelites, they are perishing of the wounds inflicted .
by fiery flying serpents, which are necessarily fatal if
they are let alone; but there is a brazen serpent to
which they may still look and live. Their eyelids may
27 *

318

A VOICE

FROM

THE

be closed, and they have neither the disposition nor the
ability to open them ; but if they still live, we may raise
their drooping lashes; and in tones of kindness, bid
them still to look and live. For as Noah and his family
found a refuge in the ark from the universal deluge, by
which the world was drowned, so may the intemperate
find security in total abstinence from intoxicating
liquors, and in this alone.
‘“‘But while we would fain inspire these views and
emotions of compassion and hope in the public mind,
as well as in the heart of the intemperate among us,
very different are the sentiments which should be felt
and expressed towards the manufacture and sale of the
drunkard’s drink by those who continue, for filthy
lucre, to perpetuate the insanity of drunkenness upon
all who come within their snare.
This trade, and all
the laws which license its accursed gains, deserve the
execration of the species. And if the consciences of
the present race of drunkard-makers continue to sleep
on while the ghosts of their murdered victims ‘ throng
the air and darken heaven,’ and the voice of their
brother’s blood is ever clamoring against them from the

graves of their customers, then all who see and feel
the unutterable curse the trade is inflicting should
array themselves against the perpetuation of the trade
by training up the rising generation with an undying
hatred for this ‘craft by which they have their gains.’
Let our children and our children’s children be taught
to prefer a life of obscurity, toil, and penury to the
wages of unrighteousness which this traffic yields. Bet-

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

319
*

ter beg their bread, and die dependent on the public
charity in an almshouse, than incur the awful curse of
Him, whose throne has denounced a ‘woe upon him
who putieth the bottle to his neighbor’s mouth,’ even
though they might thereby share in the price of blood
which the trade of drunkard-making may yield to all
who divide the spoils. Better that they leave to their
children no other legacy than ‘a good name, better
than precious ointment,’ rather than the wealth of
Croesus, acquired by the ruin of the bodies and souls
of thousands who have fallen into the drunkard’s
grave.
** So, also, for the vice of habitual though moderate
drinking, the prolific source and fountain whence flow,
in one perennial stream, drunkenness and all its woes,
—for this is the cause and only cause of the drunkard’s
monomania, and all the vices into which insanity plunges
him, and all the pangs of wretchedness it inflicts on the
innocent wives and children of its victims,—the public heart should be taught to pour’ forth nought but the
untranslated’ apostolic curse, Anathema maranatha.
Still, however, we must be permitted to plead for the
poor drunkard who has fallen by the error of the latter
into the snare of the former of these classes, and is now
the victim of his own folly and sin. For him, now that
he has become a monomaniac, we solemnly invoke the
mercy of earth and the compassion of heaven. Into
his desponding heart let some kind hand pour the oil
and wine of commiseration and sympathy so long as he
is permitted to linger upon the shores of mortality,

320

A VOICE

FROM

THE

and into his ear let some friendly voice whisper to the
very last, ‘ Brother, there is hope for thee !’”’
Such is the treatment which the managers and superintendent of the Washingtonian Home extend towards
their inmates, and to those who gather beneath its roof
as an asylum of safety from the perils and dangers of
intemperance.
Yet it would be a matter of impossibility for me to enter in detail upon the kind, quality,
and quantity of the various drugs and medicines administered by the superintendent of the Washingtonian
Home to patients who are daily being admitted for
treatment in the various stages of delirium tremens.
That is a matter known only to himself; and, as intimate as the writer of this work has been with him, he
is as yet unknowing of the secret. But this he does
know, that the treatment which is adopted has proved
signally successful, and that, in a majority of cases,
those who have passed through that treatment, after
their convalescence retain a loathing of alcoholic
drinks. Nor do I mean to say that this result is
brought about by the use of any potent or unknown
drug, for as to that I cannot speak with certainty; and
even in expressing myself as I do, I wish to be understood as referring only to individuals who are actually —
laboring under the effects of the before-mentioned diseases, for as to the subsequent and only treatment pur-

sued to reform the man, we have heretofore truthfully
spoken. I know there is a certain class of men in the
community who will cry out humbug. To such I would

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

321

say, Look at the results of the Home in its yet brief
existence, and then tell me if you can that, with
all your learning and time-honored experience, you
have ever achieved such a signal victory over intemperance.
The writer, for himself, can speak with gratitude of
the benefits he has. experienced from that Home. For
years he suffered from the curse of intemperance which
had fallen upon him, and which blasted his early prospects in life, scattered friends, as it were, to the winds
of heaven, and imbittered the declining years of affectionate parents, and almost brought their gray hairs in
sorrow to the grave. May God help him in the future
to repair the past, and by a life of strict integrity,
soothe the remainder of their days as they travel towards that unknown land, to whose unexplored tracts
we all, sooner or later, must be called. And to one
who owes his existence and little being to him, may
God, in his infinite mercy, so impress his young mind
that the dearly bought experience of his father will be
a lesson to him forever to loathe and shun the wine-cup
as the most deadly and cruel enemy of man.
May he
never, like him, suffer the agony of remorse for bright
years wasted in the spring-time of life. Hours of bitter and sad regret
— they come upon him in the full
glare of the midday sun, in the quiet twilight hour,
when memory walks with the past ; and they have, like
the unwelcome ghost of Banquo, stood, in the solemn
midnight, beside his couch as silent monitors in stern
reproof for the loss of golden links cut out and wasted

322

A VOICE

FROM

THE

WASHINGTONIAN

HOME.

from the chain of life — lost months and years gone by,
never, never to return.
“‘ Farewell! a word that must be, and hath been;
A sound which makes us linger. Yet, farewell ;
Ye who have traced the pilgrim to the scene
Which is his last, if in your memories dwell
A thought which once was his, if on ye swell
A single recollection, not in vain
He wore his sandal shoon and scallop shell.
Farewell! with him alone may rest the pain,
If such there were ; with you, the moral of his strain.”

THE

END.

GLOSSARY
or

MEDICAL

TERMS

USED

Abrasion. A wearing off.
Albuminous.
Relating to the white and
nutritive portion of the blood.
Anazeria.
Loss of appetite; aversion to
. food.
Aorta. The largest artery in the body.
Aphthous. Pertaining to a disease of the
mouth and throat; also gangrene,
Arachnoid.
A part of the brain.
Asphyzia. Suffocation.
Oeteris

things

being

equal.
Capillaries. Minute blood vessels.
Cerebral.
Relating to a portion
brain.

paribus.

Other

of the

Cicatrize. Wealing or skining over.
Coma. Torpid sleep.
Coronary vein. A vein passing over the
crown of the head.
Cul-de-sac.
A French word signifying a
closed sack.
Delirium ebriosum. Drunken madness.
Delirium traumaticum. Delirium superinduced by a wound.
Diagnosis. Distinguishing.
Encephalon.

Relating to the brain.

Erosive. An eating away.
Etheromatous.
A kind of inflammation.
Exosmosis.
The passage of the blood
through the walls of the small blood
vessels.
Extravasation.
Pouring of the blood into
the cellular membrane.

Fibrinous.

Thready, stringy matter from

which muscle is formed.
Follicles.
Small sacs contained

in

the

mucous membrane.

Gastric. Relating to the digestive organs
and fluids.
Grumous.
Thick; clotted.

Hemorrhage.
Hypertrophy.

Internal bleeding.
Excessive growth of a part

without alteration of structure.

IN

THIS

VOLUME.

Icterictic.
Having a yellow appearance, as
caused by jaundice.
Ingesta. Relating to the thing taken in.
Iymph.
A thin, whitish fluid contained
in the system.
Mammiillated.
Raised and protuberant appearance.
Mania potu. Delirium from drink.
Morbific. Tending to produce disease.
Muco-purulent. Diseased matter.
Mucous membrane.
A membrane lining
the stomach.

Omentum.
<A layer of fat covering
bowels in front.

the

Parenchyma.
Relating to the glandular
tissues.
Pathology. The science of diseases, their
causes, &c.
Peritoneal.
Relating to the serous membrane lining the cavity of the stomach.
Phlogosis.
A term used to describe a peculiar kind of inflammation.
Psora Ebriosum.
An eruption or rash
upon the body caused by drunkenness.
Pyloric orifice. An opening in the lower
part of the stomach.

Ruga, Ruge.

A fiery and red eruption.

Serum.
Watery portion of the blood.
Stertorous. A snoring kind of breathing.
Strabismus.
Squinting.
Subsultus tendinum. Twitching of the tendons.
Syncope. Fainting.

Thoracic. Pertaining to the breast.
Tinnitus aurium.
Roaring in the ears.
Trachea bronchia. Relating to the air
passages of the throat.
Ventricles.

A term applied to certain portions of the heart.
Viscera. The organs contained in the
chest and abdomen.

( 323)

.

American Cemperance Life Insurance Comyp’y,
HARTFORD,
CAPITAL

AND
SURPLUS,
SECURELY INVESTED.
OFFICERS

EDSON

CONN.
$208,000,

AND DIRECTORS.

FESSENDEN, PReEsIDENT.
JAMES B. HOSMER, Vicr PRESIDENT.
WILLIAM H. HILL,

Secretary.

DIRECTORS.
EDSON FESSENDEN,
JAMES B. HOSMER,
BARZILLAI HUDSON,
ALBERT DAY,

GURDON TRUMBULL,
TERTIUS WADSWORTH,
EDWARD GOODMAN,
JOHN H. GOODWIN,

A. W. BARROWS,
BOARD
Hon. THOMAS
Hon. THOMAS

OF

.

PuysiIcran.

COUNCILLORS.

S. WILLIAMS, Hartrorp.
CLARK, LATE TREASURER

OF CONN.

CHANCELLOR R, H. WALWORTH,
TOGA SprinGs, N. Y.

GEORGE W. MOORE,
NEWTON CASE,
JAMES CAMPBELL.

Sara-

Hon. NEAL DOW, PorRTLAND, Mz.
DgAcON MOSES GRANT, Boston, Mass.
JOHN A. FOOTE, EsqQ., CLEVELAND, O7110.
EDW. C. DELAVAN, Batusron Spa, N. ¥.
Hon. SALMA HALE, KeeEns, N. H.

The attention of the public is invited to the following distinguishing features of this institution: —
1st. This Company is entirely mutual, doing business solely
for the benefit of those holding Life Policies.
2d. It insures only the lives of persons of temperate habits.
3d. Believing that such risks are much less hazardous, we
have reduced the rates of premium, adopted by other companies, to a standard proportionate with the character of the risks
assumed, thus giving temperance men the full benefit of their
principles.
4th. The business is exclusively on the cash plan, receiving
no notes for premium and giving no scrip certificates of dividends, these being paid in cash, or applied on the next annual
premium.

5th. This Company can make no assessments.
Applications can be made to the subscriber for insurance in
this Company, or any information will be cheerfully given in
relation to its peculiar features.
ALBERT

DAY, Agent, 36 Charles St., Boston.
(324)
—

=.

ae
-_

F

"

Dia

:

:

ee:he

:

'

i
,

‘

ou

'

=
ie y
<—-

»

Tih

i]

adi
ene

- Si.cae

bane:

tle
nt
be

*

NEN

Minted
Bh
NONEOt

“es

é
a

“a.
Mak,
Vago

4

-

ee
nar atte bbw see
ee a

-

¢

_

2
e

a;

“*,
=

tas

a7

-

«

ee

~

Ob ee ae Ag 10

F:
uth,

Pai
ig onl ch1

"atl

pea!

ee,
re eo Sg
nee
ay

CA
nd

EB

a
Te
ea»
.

~

ICD

LRA

a¥
aptahoas
:

'

a

Fatty sen
.
we t

