«  OIJ\^R- WENDELL*  HOLMES  9 

I  LIBRA  R  Y  | 

#  ...  * 

*  «&&&£&*  * 

%  *  *  •  *  **?• 


GIFT  OF 

JOHN  A.  GARVER 
CLASS  OF  1871 


THE  ORIGINS  OF 
PROHIBITION 


OTHER  BORZOI  BOOKS 
OF  SOCIAL  SIGNIFICANCE 

HISTORY  AND  PROSPECTS  OF  THE  SOCIAL  SCIENCES 
Edited  by  Harry  Elmer  Barnes 

CAN  BUSINESS  PREVENT  UNEMPLOYMENT? 
by  John  R.  Commons,  Earnest  Draper, 

Sam  A.  Lewisohn ,  Don  D.  Lescohier 

THE  BIOLOGY  OF  POPULATION  GROWTH 
by  Raymond  I  earl 

THE  DESTINY  OF  A  CONTINENT 
by  Manuel  Uyarte 


THE  ORIGINS  OF 
PROHIBITION 


BY 

JOHN  ALLEN  KROUT 

Instructor  in  History,  Columbia  University . 


NEW  YORK  ALFRED  •  A  •  KNOPF  MCMXXV 


COPYRIGHT,  I925,  BY  ALFRED  A.  KNOPF,  INC. 


"S>  b  O  *?  3> 

e 


17s 


MANUFACTURED  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA 


TO  MY  FATHER  AND  MOTHER 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2019  with  funding  from 
Kahle/Austin  Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/originsofprohibiOOOOkrou 


FOREWORD 


On  January  29,  1919,  the  Secretary  of  State  announced 
that  the  required  number  of  states  had  ratified  the  Eight¬ 
eenth  Amendment  to  the  Constitution.  The  subsequent 
passage  of  the  Volstead  Act  by  Congress,  defining  and  en¬ 
forcing  the  provisions  of  the  Amendment,  gave  the  Anti- 
Saloon  League  and  its  allies  a  victory  in  their  fight  for  a 
“saloonless  nation.”  To  many  Americans  prohibition  came 
with  something  of  a  shock.  Though  they  wrere  aware  of  the 
political  power  possessed  by  the  enemies  of  the  liquor  traffic, 
they  had  not  realized  that  the  r  formers  were  so  near  the 
goal.  The  immediate  reaction  of  some  was  to  cry  fraud, 
since  it  seemed  impossible  that  the  people  of  a  great  nation 
could  be  fairly  persuaded  to  write  into  their  fundamental 
law  so  radical  a  change  in  social  customs.  To  others,  the 
restrictions  on  personal  liberty  were  plainly  contrary  to 
that  individualism  which  had  always  been  the  genius  of 
American  institutions.  To  a  great  many,  it  was  all  a 
mystery.  Accordingly,  publicists  set  forth  elaborate  theo¬ 
ries  to  explain  to  the  country  how  and  why  prohibition  had 
emerged  from  remote  possibility  into  startling  reality. 

These  theories  dealt  chiefly  with  the  forces  and  events 
which  seemed  to  be  immediately  responsible  for  the  ratifica¬ 
tion  of  the  Eighteenth  Amendment.  The  present  study, 
while  offering  no  complete  solution  of  the  riddle  of  prohibi¬ 
tion,  attempts  to  present  some  of  the  factors  which  prepared 
the  way  for  the  destruction  of  the  saloon.  It  seeks  the 
origin  of  the  prohibitory  movement  in  early  evidences  of 
social  concern  over  the  intemperate  use  of  intoxicants. 


FOREWORD 


How  the  temperance  crusade  became  a  national  campaign 
for  restrictive  legislation  against  the  liquor  traffic  is  to  be 
the  theme  of  the  following  pages.  From  the  seventeenth 
and  eighteenth  century  protests  against  drunkenness  the 
slowly  growing  hostility  to  the  use  of  intoxicants  is  traced, 
through  many  devious  turnings,  to  the  Maine  Liquor  Law 
of  1851.  The  latter  time  limit  is  imposed  because  the 
enactment  of  the  Maine  Law  marked  the  end  of  an  epoch  in 
temperance  reform.  Henceforth,  the  battle  was  to  be  waged 
not  by  precept  and  example,  but  by  political  action.  How 
this  transition  occurred  is  a  story  which  the  author  hopes 
may  throw  a  ray  of  light  here  and  there  on  the  liquor  problem 
of  today. 

To  Professor  Dixon  Ryan  Fox  of  Columbia  University, 
who  suggested  the  possibilities  of  this  subject,  the  author  is 
deeply  indebted  for  constant  encouragement  and  inspiration, 
and  for  that  constructive  criticism  which  only  a  friend  can 
offer.  At  the  sacrifice  of  many  hours,  Professor  Fox  has 
reviewed  the  entire  manuscript.  Dean  Herbert  E.  Hawkes 
of  Columbia  College  kindly  loaned  the  manuscript  of  Rever¬ 
end  Ebenezer  Sparhawk’s  temperance  sermon,  preached  at 
Templeton,  Massachusetts,  in  1776.  The  author  wishes  also 
to  acknowledge  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Victor  Hugo  Paltsits 
of  the  New  York  Public  Library,  of  Mr.  Clarence  S.  Brig¬ 
ham,  Librarian  of  the  American  Antiquarian  Society,  and 
of  the  staff  of  the  American  history  room  in  the  New  York 
Public  Library.  He  is  under  many  incidental  obligations  to 
his  associates  in  the  department  of  history  at  Columbia  for 
valuable  suggestions  and  willing  co-operation.  Also,  he  is 
indebted  to  his  wife,  Marion  Dorothy  Krout,  for  corrections 
in  the  proof.  For  the  imperfections  which  remain,  whether 
in  form  or  content,  the  author  alone  is  responsible. 

John  Allen  Krout. 


Columbia  University,  May,  1925. 


CONTENTS 


I 

The  Basis  of  Regulation 

1 

II 

Glimpses  of  an  Old  Order 

26 

III 

Voices  in  the  Wilderness 

51 

IV 

A  Philadelphia  Physician 

71 

V 

Saving  Society 

83 

VI 

The  Church  Militant 

101 

VII 

Organizing  for  Victory 

124 

VIII 

Dissension  Within  the  Ranks 

153 

IX 

The  Washingtonian  Revival 

182 

X 

The  Literature  of  Protest 

223 

XI 

Prophets  of  Prohibition 

262 

XII 

A  Summary  View 

297 

Bibliography 

305 

Index 

329 

* 


CHAPTER  I 


THE  BASIS  OF  REGULATION 

A  eecent  publication  from  the  press  of  the  Anti-Saloon 
League  is  responsible  for  the  dictum  that  the  “American 
liquor  problem  is  as  old  as  the  white  man’s  knowledge  of 
the  American  continent.”  1  If  this  be  true,  the  problem 
long  existed  in  the  midst  of  a  people  who  little  comprehended 
its  real  significance.  Though  the  establishment  of  the  first 
English  settlements  was  marked  by  the  transit  of  European 
drinking  customs  to  the  New  World,  the  seventeenth  century 
colonists  did  not  regard  that  fact  as  a  cause  for  unusual 
anxiety.  For  two  centuries  after  the  founding  of  Jamestown 
there  was  no  organized  attempt  to  restrict  the  normal  use 
of  intoxicants  or  to  define  their  influence  on  the  interests  of 
the  group.  Save  in  the  case  of  Georgia,  where  Oglethorpe’s 
futile  efforts  directed  attention  to  the  destructive  nature  of 
distilled  spirits,  there  was  no  widespread  condemnation  of 
spirituous  liquors.  Puritan  clergymen,  Dutch  merchants 
and  Virginia  planters  agreed  that  the  use  of  alcoholic  bev¬ 
erages  was  not  only  beneficial,  but  also  necessary.  They 
were  quick,  however,  to  rebuke  individual  excesses ;  for  all 
such  indiscretions  signified  an  abuse  of  nature’s  wholesome 
gifts,  and  were,  therefore,  violations  of  the  Divine  will  in 
regard  to  man’s  use  of  natural  blessings.  The  liquor  prob¬ 
lem,  they  felt,  embraced  little  beyond  the  occasional  lapse 
of  individuals  from  judicious  self-control.  The  line  of 

i  Ernest  H.  Cherrington,  The  Evolution  of  Prohibition  in  the  United 
State*,  p.  9. 


1 


2  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

moderation  was  drawn  variously  in  different  communities, 
making  some  localities  more  sober,  or  at  least  less  indulgent, 
than  others ;  but  all  were  solicitous  that  there  be  an  adequate 
and  cheap  supply  of  good  liquor  available.  Restraint  was 
necessary  only  for  those  incorrigibles  who  insisted  on  flaunt¬ 
ing  the  evidence  of  their  over-indulgence  in  the  faces  of  their 
more  abstemious  fellows. 

The  regulative  measures  of  the  colonial  period,  inspired 
in  part  by  the  desire  to  outlaw  drunkenness,  were  not  de¬ 
signed  to  reform  social  customs.  In  them  was  continued 
that  thread  of  public  control  traceable  in  such  employments 
as  common  carriage  and  inn-keeping  from  the  manorial  and 
municipal  regulations  of  fourteenth  century  England. 
They  reflected  the  familiar  outlines  of  a  system  which  had 
been  taking  form  for  over  two  hundred  years.  By  their 
provisions  the  freeholder  of  the  new  Ipswich  in  Massachusetts 
Bay,  conferring  on  his  town  the  boon  of  a  public  tavern, 
was  subject  to  restrictions  closely  resembling  those  which 
burdened  the  busy  inn-keeper  in  old  Ipswich  across  the 
sea.2  This  similarity  signified  neither  a  conscious  imitation 
of  English  methods,  nor  a  general  translation  of  liquor  laws 
from  England  to  America.  Rather  did  it  indicate  the  fact 
that  men  do  not  suddenly  abandon  a  system  of  action  under 
which  they  have  long  lived  even  if  they  move  into  a  strange 
environment.  They  cannot  altogether  escape  the  ideas  and 
institutions  of  their  former  experience.  Since  the  English 
migration  to  the  New  World  began  in  the  opening  decades 
of  the  seventeenth  century,  just  as  a  reasonably  effective 
control  over  the  liquor  traffic  had  been  achieved  through  the 
device  of  licensing,  it  was  natural  for  the  colonists  to  meet 
a  novel  situation  with  variations  of  an  old  and  well-known 
plan.  In  a  few  instances  they  re-enacted  statutes  of  the 
mother  country,  but  such  legislation  was  merely  a  temporary 

2  Cf.  Joseph  B.  Felt,  Ipswich,  Essex  and  Hamilton,  p.  112;  Nathaniell 
Bacon,  Annalls  of  Ipswiche,  pp.  199,  204. 


THE  BASIS  OF  REGULATION  3 

expedient  till  more  satisfactory  measures  could  be  formu¬ 
lated.3 

A  wide  variety  of  motives,  usually  unrelated  to  any  ab¬ 
stract  theory  of  social  control,  persuaded  the  governing 
authorities  in  the  several  colonies  to  interfere  with  the 
natural  development  of  the  trade  in  intoxicants.  The  chief 
impulse  probably  was  furnished  by  the  desire  to  prevent 
personal  excesses  and  public  disorders,  but  this  was  compli¬ 
cated  by  a  whole  host  of  minor  considerations.  The  dis¬ 
covery,  confirmed  by  harrowing  experiences,  that  the  Ameri¬ 
can  Indian  under  the  influence  of  the  “good  creature”  was 
a  menace  to  life  and  property,4  the  necessity  of  providing 
adequate  accommodations  for  travellers,  the  importance  of 
the  brewing  and  distilling  industries  and  the  fact  that  sorely 
needed  revenues  could  be  most  easily  secured  from  an  assess¬ 
ment  against  the  liquor  traffic,  all  played  their  part  in  de¬ 
termining  the  character  and  course  of  regulation.  Each  was 
a  force  responsible  for  specific  statutes  in  every  one  of  the 
thirteen  colonies. 

The  suppression  of  drunkenness  was  early  advanced  as  a 
reason  for  restrictive  measures.  In  1622  Sir  Francis 
Wyatt,  governor  of  Virginia,  was  advised  by  the  council  of 
the  London  Company  to  effect  a  “speedie  redress”  of  the 
enormous  excess  of  drinking,  the  “cry  whereof  cannot  but 
have  gone  to  Heaven,  since  the  infamy  hath  spread  itself  to 
all  that  have  heard  the  name  of  Virginia.”  5  The  General 
Court  of  Massachusetts  Bay  in  1637  discovered  that  “much 
drunkenness,  waste  of  the  good  creature  of  God,  mispence 

s  For  an  excellent  brief  account  of  the  licensing  system  in  England 
see  Sidney  and  Beatrice  Webb,  The  History  of  Liquor  Licensing  in 
England,  pp.  1-14.  Cf.  J.  F.  Grimke,  editor,  The  Public  Laics  of  South 
Carolina  (1790),  1,  15;  Fran£ois  Martin,  A  Collection  of  the  Statutes  of 
England  now  in  force  in  the  State  of  North  Carolina  (1792). 

*  This  term  was  commonly  used  in  the  English  colonies  during  the 
seventeenth  century  to  designate  distilled  spirits. 

s  Letter  of  August  1,  1622,  Edward  D.  Neill,  History  of  the  Virginia 
Company  of  London,  p.  322. 


4  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

of  precious  time,  and  other  disorders”  in  the  inns  of  the 
colony  required  special  attention.6  Connecticut’s  code  of 
laws,  approved  in  1650,  recognized  the  “necessary  use”  of 
ordinaries  and  houses  of  common  entertainment  where  liquor 
was  sold,  but  established  strict  rules  governing  the  conduct 
of  proprietor  and  patron.7  So  in  every  colony,  the  person 
who  lacked  both  self-control  and  a  sense  of  social  responsi¬ 
bility  furnished  the  pretext  for  governmental  interference.8 

In  the  matter  of  observing  the  accepted  canons  of  mod¬ 
erate  drinking  the  American  Indian  was  an  inveterate  trans¬ 
gressor.  Finding  the  ecstasies  of  intoxication  the  most 
attractive  feature  of  the  white  man’s  “fire-water,”  he  failed 
to  appreciate  the  advantages  of  self-restraint.  To  the  col¬ 
onists,  the  degradation  of  scores  of  peaceful  natives,  and 
the  transformation  of  hundreds  of  others  into  marauding 
savages  strikingly  signified  the  need  for  definite  regulation 
of  the  Indian  trade.9  Virginia’s  unfortunate  experience 
with  an  uncontrolled  trade  was  so  well  known  that  Governor 
Endicott  was  warned  by  the  Massachusetts  Bay  Compan}'  in 
1629  to  take  precautions  lest  the  savages  “be  induced  to  the 
excessive  use  or  rather  abuse  of  strong  waters.”  10  The 
early  laws  universally  forbade  the  sale  or  gift  to  Indians 

6  Records  of  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  I, 
213.  (To  be  cited  Mass.  Col.  Doc.) 

7  Public  Records  of  the  Colony  of  Connecticut,  1,  533.  (To  be  cited 
Conn.  Pub.  Rec.) 

s  One  searches  in  vain  in  the  colonial  records  to  find  a  clear  distinction 
between  the  various  types  of  public  houses.  “Inn,”  “ordinary”  and 
“tavern”  are  used  indiscriminately  to  indicate  a  house  which  lodged 
travellers  and  usually  sold  liquor  as  part  of  its  entertainment.  “Re¬ 
tailers”  sold  in  small  quantities  to  all  comers,  but  provided  no  accom¬ 
modations.  They  were  not  allowed  to  entertain  customers  in  their  es¬ 
tablishments.  The  term  “ale-house,”  so  common  in  England,  was  rarely 
used  in  America. 

»  John  Winthrop,  The  History  of  New  England,  I,  406-407. 

io  For  typical  regulations  of  this  nature,  see  Mass.  Col.  Doc.,  I,  106; 
Conn.  Pub.  Rec.,  1,  256;  Records  of  the  Colony  of  Rhode  Island  and 
Providence  Plantations,  I,  279  (to  be  cited  R.  I.  Col.  Rec.);  Colonial 
Laws  of  New  York,  I,  41;  Archives  of  Maryland,  XXXVIII,  15. 


THE  BASIS  OF  REGULATION  5 

of  wine  or  distilled  spirits  but  beer  and  malt  liquors  usually 
escaped  the  ban.11  In  spite  of  the  tremendous  difficulties 
of  enforcement,  an  earnest  effort  was  made  in  certain  sections 
to  apprehend  violators  of  the  law,  and  heavy  penalties  were 
frequently  imposed.  Connecticut,  for  example,  administered 
corporal  punishment  to  any  servant  found  guilty  of  furnish¬ 
ing  Indians  with  liquor,  while  New  Netherland  sent  some  of 
its  substantial  citizens  back  to  Holland  for  the  same 
offence.12  Total  prohibition  of  the  traffic,  however,  was  un¬ 
desirable  from  the  standpoint  of  those  interested  in  the 
development  of  colonial  commerce.  In  the  hands  of  shrewd 
traders  ardent  spirits  were  an  open  sesame  to  the  riches  of 
the  fur-trade,  ai  d  many  an  ambitious  landholder  found 
them  efficacious  in  suppressing  Indian  claims  to  choice  tracts 
whir  h  he  desired.  Thus,  economic  considerations,  more  pow¬ 
erful  than  any  fear  of  drunken  savages,  wrought  a  gradual 
withdrawal  of  governmental  restrictions.  Rhode  Island, 
which  originally  trusted  only  Roger  Williams  to  dole  out 
wine  and  “strong  water”  for  Indian  consumption,  in  1655 
permitted  two  ordinary-keepers  in  each  town  to  sell  limited 
quantities.13  Massachusetts,  likewise,  selected  in  each  town 
dea  lers  who  might  sell  on  condition  that  they  did  not  supply 
any  Indian  with  more  than  a  pint  at  a  time.  In  Pennsyl¬ 
vania  the  assembly  authorized  the  governor  to  suspend  the 
prohibitory  legislation,  if  the  tribal  chiefs  consented  to  have 
their  drunken  subjects  punished  in  accordance  with  the 
provincial  laws.  Everywhere  the  profits  of  commercial 
intercourse  tended  to  break  down  the  safeguards  which  the 
legislators  threw  about  the  traffic.14 

11  Cf.  Records  and  Files  of  the  Quarterly  Courts  of  Essex  County, 
Mass.,  VIII,  435-6;  Early  Records  of  the  Town  of  Providence,  II,  83. 

12  Conn.  Pub.  Rec.,  Ill,  228;  Documents  Relative  to  the  Colonial  His¬ 
tory  of  the  State  of  New  York,  XII,  69;  XIII,  67-8.  (To  be  cited 
N/Y.  Col.  Doc.) 

18  R.  I.  Col.  Rec.,  I,  308. 

i*Mass.  Col.  Doc.,  Ill,  369.  The  difficulties  encountered  by  the  au- 


6  THE  ORIGINS  01  PROHIBITION 

But  restriction  was  not  the  ,0]e  objective  of  colonial 
legislatures  which  framed  bills  reiPUiating  the  liquor  trade. 
Many  statutes  were  plainly  inttnded  to  encourage  inn¬ 
keeping,  brewing  and  distilling.  Sii.ce  spirituous  as  well  as 
malt  liquors  were  considered  an  integral  part  of  the  daily 
diet,  their  sale  was  intimately  associateq  with  the  furnishing 
of  entertainment  for  travellers.  Each  colony  desired  that 
the  public-houses  within  its  borders  should  be  adequate  to 
meet  the  steadily  increasing  demands  made  upon  them  by 
expanding  commercial  activity,  and  whenever  the  number  of 
inns  seemed  insufficient,  it  was  expected  that  the  legisls  ture 
would  provide  relief.  With  his  great  faitffi  in  the  efficacy  of 
written  law,  the  American  colonist  believed  that  the  pfoper 
statute  could  produce  accommodations  for  travellers  vfhere 
private  initiative  had  failed.  Maryland  presented  a  con¬ 
spicuous  example  of  a  regulation  which  was  designed 
encourage.  Until  1662  the  province  was  without  regular 
public-houses,  though  well  supplied  with  tippling-hou.veS  of  a 
low  order.15  This  situation  the  assembly  endeavoured  to 
remedy  by  an  act  for  the  encouragement  of  ordinary-keepers. 
The  preamble  explained,  with  customary  completeness', ,  the 
motives  which  the  legislators  thought  had  influenced  tl  iem. 
The  absence  of  proper  accommodations  for  travellers  ex¬ 
posed  persons  attending  the  county  courts  or  transacting 
business  in  remote  parts  of  the  province  Lo  great  inconveni¬ 
ence  and  even  danger.  Besides,  it  often  placed  an  unpft’as~ 
ant  burden  on  private  families  to  supply  food  and  lodging  f  or 
some  belated  and  importunate  wayfarer.  In  order  to  encour¬ 
age  prospective  inn-keepers,  a  special  licence  was  to  be 
granted  by  the  Proprietor  or  his  representative,  conferring 
on  the  licensee  a  monopoly  of  the  sale  of  liquors  in  his  dis- 

thorities  in  Pennsylvania  are  clearly  set  forth  in  Shepherd,  History  of 
Proprietary  Government  in  Pennsylvania,  pp.  107-110. 

is  George  Alsop,  A  Character  of  Maryland,  N.  D.  Mereness,  editor,  p. 
50. 


THE  BASIS  OF  REGULATION  7 

trict.16  That  this  special  permission  assumed  the  aspect  of 
coercion,  when  trade  was  dull  and  debts  hard  to  collect,  is 
evidenced  by  the  petition  of  William  Smith,  an  inn-keeper  at 
St.  Mary’s,  who  begged  to  be  relieved  of  his  licence  because  he 
had  been  compelled  to  keep  a  public-house  and  give  credit 
throughout  the  province  much  to  his  financial  detriment.17 

Maryland  was  not  peculiar  in  the  attempt  to  foster  the 
location  of  inns  and  taverns  at  strategic  places.  In  1637 
the  General  Court  of  Massachusetts  had  ordered  each  town 
to  present  a  man  to  be  allowed  to  sell  wine  and  “strong 
water,”  lest  the  public  suffer  from  the  lack  of  proper  ac¬ 
commodations.18  Connecticut  placed  upon  each  town  the 
duty  to  choose  from  the  freemen  a  suitable  person  to  keep 
an  ordinary  where  beer  and  ale  were  sold.19  As  an  induce¬ 
ment  to  Rhode  Islanders  to  provide  accommodations  for 
the  travelling  public,  two  dealers  in  each  town  were  granted 
a  monopoly  of  the  liquor  trade.20  In  all  parts  of  the  col¬ 
onies  operators  of  important  ferries  and  toll-bridges  were 
compelled  to  furnish  all  the  conveniences  of  a  tavern  under 
the  terms  of  a  special  licence.21  From  these  acts  it  is  evi¬ 
dent  that  the  spirit  controlling  the  regulation  of  the  liquor 
traffic  manifested  no  tendency  toward  prohibition.  The  legis¬ 
lators  appreciated  the  vast  social  importance  of  the  trade 
and  desired  to  utilize  its  manifold  possibilities  for  the  best 
interests  of  the  community. 

In  the  machinery  of  regulation  the  device  of  licensing  was 
of  primary  importance.  Ancient  in  origin,  and  tested  for 
over  a  century  in  England,  it  possessed  advantages  that 
could  not  be  disregarded.  Although  the  English  experience 
had  not  been  uniformly  successful,  a  decided  improvement  in 

is  Archives  of  Maryland,  I,  447.  (To  be  cited  Md.  Arch.) 

nibid.,  II,  50. 

is  Mass.  Col.  Doc.,  I,  221. 

is  Cqnn.  Pub.  Rec.,  I,  103. 

20  R.  I.  Col.  Rec.  I,  280. 

21  Colonial  Records  of  North  Carolina,  XXIII,  728. 


8  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

the  operation  of  the  system  occurred  during  the  seventeenth 
century.  From  a  plan  thus  ready  to  hand,  the  colonists 
picked  the  features  which  satisfied  the  conditions  peculiar 
to  their  new  environment.  With  the  exception  of  New 
Netherland  and  Georgia  the  colonial  establishments  de¬ 
veloped  the  licensing  function  along  similar,  if  not  identical, 
lines.  The  authority  to  license  was  early  assumed  by  the 
legislatures,  which  delegated  the  power  as  they  saw  fit,22 
usually  vesting  the  right  of  selection  in  one  of  three  agents ; 
the  governor  or  proprietor,  the  county  court,  or  the  town 
board  of  selectmen.  These  agents  were  virtually  free  to 
make  whatever  choice  they  pleased,  though  the  law  assumed 
that  they  would  license  only  persons  of  good  standing  in  the 
community.  They  were  expected  to  locate  the  public-houses 
at  places  frequented  by  the  justices  holding  county  court, 
along  main-travelled  roads,  and  near  important  bridges  and 
ferries,  lest  any  traveller  should  fail  to  secure  accommoda¬ 
tions  while  meeting  the  demands  of  justice  or  trade.23  As 
population  increased  and  it  became  correspondingly  difficult 
for  the  governor,  or  the  proprietor’s  representative,  to  select 
intelligently  the  persons  to  be  favoured  with  licences,  the  se¬ 
lective  power  was  generally  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  county 
court.  By  the  mid-eighteenth  century  in  all  of  the  colonies, 
save  Pennsylvania,  Delaware  and  Rhode  Island,  this  transi¬ 
tion  had  taken  place.24  Pennsylvania  and  Delaware  still 
recognized  the  governor  as  the  licensing  agent,  though  the 
licensee  had  to  be  recommended  by  the  justices  in  the  county 
courts.25  With  its  usR&i  »mphasis  upon  local  government, 

22  In  Massachusetts  the  General  Court  selected  the  keepers  of  public- 
houses  until  1644.  See  Mass.  Col.  Doc.,  II,  188. 

23  Consult:  Mass.  Col.  Doc.,  I,  140;  it.  I.  Col.  Rec.,  I,  185-6;  Md, 
Arch.,  I,  447;  W.  W.  Hening,  editor,  Statutes  at  Large  ...  of  Vir¬ 
ginia,  I,  287. 

24  Hening,  VI,  71-6;  Md.  Arch.,  VII,  65-8;  Conn.  Pub.  Rec.,  II,  76; 
Colonial  Records  of  North  Carolina,  XXIII,  182-5. 

25  Laws  of  the  State  of  Delaware  ( 1797 ),  I,  192—6.  For  the  contest 


THE  BASIS  OF  REGULATION  9 

Rhode  Island  confirmed  to  the  town  selectmen  the  choice  of 
tavern-keepers.26 

The  designation  of  the  county  court  as  licensing  agent 
paralleled  the  English  system  at  its  best,  for  justices  of  the 
peace  in  special  sessions,  acting  under  Parliamentary  au¬ 
thorization,  controlled  the  granting  of  liquor  licences 
throughout  England.27  Unlike  their  English  prototype, 
however,  the  colonial  justices  in  the  eighteenth  century  no 
longer  possessed  full  discretionary  powers  in  making  selec¬ 
tions.  They  were  subject  to  statutory  mandates  which 
reduced  them  to  the  level  of  mere  registrars  of  licences.  In 
Massachusetts,  for  instance,  their  choice  was  conditioned 
by  the  opinion  of  the  town  selectmen  on  the  fitness  of 
applicants.28  Likewise,  the  endorsement  of  the  town  meeting 
was  a  necessary  qualification  for  any  successful  petitioner 
to  the  county  court  in  Connecticut.29  Under  the  Duke’s 
Laws  the  justices  in  New  York  could  issue  a  licence  only 
upon  receipt  of  a  certificate  of  good  behaviour  from  the 
constable  and  two  overseers  of  the  parish.30  The  assembly 
of  Maryland  forbade  the  courts  to  license  anyone  who  held 
public  office  wdthin  the  province.31  Thus,  while  the  justices 
could  create  valuable  business  monopolies,  they  could  not 
award  them  to  their  personal  or  political  friends,  unless  the 
specific  requirements  of  the  law  were  satisfied. 

The  idea  of  selling  the  liquor  monopoly  for  a  definite 
district  at  a  high  price,  either  to  raise  revenue  or  to  limit 
the  number  of  licensees,  was  not  evident  in  the  early 
legislation.  A  small  clerical  fee  usually  constituted  the 

over  authority  of  the  governor  in  Pennsylvania  see  W.  R.  Shepherd, 
History  of  Proprietary  Government  in  Pennsylvania,  pp.  80-81. 

26  R.  I.  Col.  Pec.,  IV,  418. 

27  Webb,  op.  cit.,  pp.  5-14. 

28  Joseph  B.  Felt,  The  Annals  of  Salem,  I,  419. 

29  Conn.  Pub.  Rec.,  IV,  145. 

so  Duke  of  Yorke’s  Book  of  Laws,  p.  30. 

si  Hd.  Arch.,  XXXIX,  290. 


10  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

only  charge  made  for  a  licence.  But,  as  the  trade  became 
more  profitable  and  the  establishments  more  numerous, 
statute  followed  statute  imposing  constantly  increasing 
fees.  The  charges  in  New  England,  graduated  according  to 
the  profits  of  the  dealers,  were  generally  higher  than  in  the 
colonies  to  the  south.  The  Boston  taverner  paid  £15  for 
his  licence,  while  the  keeper  of  a  public-house  in  Philadelphia 
was  charged  £3.  Rhode  Island  placed  a  maximum  limit  of 
£10  and  instructed  the  towns  to  regulate  the  fee  according 
to  the  needs  of  the  community.  Throughout  the  colonies 
the  sale  of  malt  liquors  was  favoured  by  the  imposition  of 
merely  a  nominal  fee  for  a  permit  to  conduct  a  house 
retailing  only  beer  and  ale. 

The  disposition  of  the  revenue  from  licences  was  the  cause 
of  much  friction  between  local  and  provincial  authorities 
and  between  governors  and  the  popularly  elected  assemblies. 
While  the  fees  were  ordinarily  a  perquisite  of  the  governor  in 
the  royal  colonies  and  of  the  proprietor  in  the  proprietary 
provinces,  Connecticut  and  Rhode  Island  granted  them  to 
the  respective  towns.32  In  Maryland  the  struggle  over  the 
proprietor’s  prerogative  in  the  matter  of  licence  fees  consti¬ 
tuted  an  interesting  episode  in  the  general  conflict  waged 
during  the  eighteenth  century  between  the  colonial  governors 
and  the  popular  assemblies.  From  the  outset  the  Calverts 
had  regarded  the  fees  as  a  part  of  their  income,  and  the 
assembly  had  entered  no  protest  until  1739,  when  an  attempt 
was  made  to  appropriate  the  money  for  an  extension  of  the 
militarj7  establishment.33  Lord  Baltimore  was  obstinate 
and  vetoed  the  bill  as  often  as  the  assembly  passed  it,  with 
the  result  that  for  sixteen  years  the  governor  was  embar¬ 
rassed  by  the  tactics  of  a  legislative  body  which  refused  to 
vote  important  funds  at  critical  periods.  After  Braddock’s 

32  Cf.  Colonial  Laws  of  New  York,  IV,  729-730;  Colonial  Records  of 
North  Carolina,  XXIII,  182—185;  Laws  of  Delaware,  I,  192-196;  Md. 
Arch.,  XV,  78-79;  Hening,  VI,  71-76. 

S3  Letter  of  Governor  Sharpe,  Md.  Arch.,  VI,  235. 


THE  BASIS  OF  REGULATION 


11 

disastrous  defeat  in  1755,  the  proprietor  withdrew  from  his 
position  and  allowed  the  licence  fees  to  be  expended  in 
meeting  the  existing  military  emergency.34  As  soon  as  the 
danger .  had  passed,  however,  the  struggle  was  renewed, 
throwing  the  whole  licensing  system  into  such  confusion  that 
Governor  Sharpe  reported  in  1764  that  anyone  who  pleased 
kept  a  tavern.35  Sharpe  sought  relief  under  the  terms  of  the 
Stamp  Act,  which  empowered  colonial  governors  to  issue 
licences  in  case  no  other  regulation  existed,  but  his  faith  in 
that  ill-fated  measure  was  sadly  misplaced.36  Finally,  the 
governor’s  council  handed  down  a  decision,  denying  the 
proprietor’s  claims  and  affirming  the  assembly’s  power  to 
suppress  undesirable  public-houses  under  the  English  com¬ 
mon  law.37  This  opinion  served  as  a  modus  rivendi  until 
the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution  removed  all  effective  opposi¬ 
tion  to  the  assembly’s  control. 

The  case  of  Maryland  was  an  exception  to  the  normal 
administration  of  the  licence  system.  Ordinarily,  the  chief 
source  of  friction  was  the  selection  of  successful  applicants. 
The  question  of  renewals  was  also  important,  since  the 
authorities  could  suppress  any  public-house  by  refusing  to 
renew  the  licence  at  the  expiration  of  a  year’s  time.38  Such 
refusals  might  be  based  on  the  misconduct  of  the  licensee, 
the  decision  of  the  court  that  the  quota  of  taverns  had  been 
exceeded,  or  on  some  personal  preference  of  the  justices. 
Colonial  assemblies  urged  the  courts  to  suppress  disorderly 
houses,  and  the  law-breaking  publican  was  liable  to  have  his 
sign  torn  down  by  the  constable.39  To  what  extent  the 

3 *Md.  Arch.,  XXXI,  495. 

35  Ibid.,  XIV,  172. 

selbid.,  XIV,  201. 

37  Ibid.,  XXXII,  145-6. 

38  Cf.  Hening,  VI,  71-76;  Pa.  Statutes  at  Large,  III,  291-295;  Colo¬ 
nial  Records  of  North  Carolina,  XXIII,  182-185. 

39  Following  the  English  custom,  removal  of  the  sign-board  signified 
the  withdrawal  of  the  licence.  See  Webb,  op.  cit.,  p.  10  n. 


12  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

justices  revoked  licences  for  reasons  of  public  policy  or 
personal  pique  could  be  determined  only  by  a  careful  analysis 
of  the  county  court  records,  few  of  which  have  been  preserved 
in  available  form.  The  scant  evidence  consulted,  however, 
seems  to  indicate  that  there  were  few  complaints  of  arbitrary 
action  on  the  part  of  the  justices.40  The  tendency  was 
rather  toward  a  too  generous  awarding  of  licences  in  most 
localities.  In  New  England  local  favourites  were  chosen 
tavern-keepers  year  after  year  with  as  much  regularity  as 
marked  the  re-election  of  the  town  magistrates.41  Where 
no  numerical  limit  was  fixed  by  statute,  the  justices  were 
prone  to  increase  the  public-houses  on  the  slightest  pretext, 
thus  creating  unnecessary  and  sometimes  objectionable 
businesses.  This  situation  in  Massachusetts  called  forth  a 
vigorous  protest  to  the  Court  of  Quarter  Sessions  against 
the  excessive  number  of  inns  and  taverns  in  Haverhill  and 
Salisbury.  Similarly,  a  Philadelphia  grand  jury,  of  which 
Benjamin  Franklin  was  foreman,  presented  a  report  in  1744 
decrying  the  existence  of  over  one  hundred  public-houses  in 
the  city  and  recommending  that  the  court  exercise  more 
freely  its  power  of  suppression.42 

With  regard  to  the  conditions  imposed  upon  the  inn¬ 
keeper,  the  colonial  statutes  were  so  definite  and  complete 
that  the  discretionary  power  of  the  justices  was  reduced  to 
a  minimum.  In  harmony  with  a  strongly  paternalistic 
philosophy  the  legislatures  devised  a  multitude  of  restrictions 
so  comprehensive  that  it  was  a  wise  host  who,  after  giving 
bond  to  obey  the  laws,  knew  all  the  limitations  of  his  occupa- 

40  For  forfeiture  of  licence,  see  Mass.  Col.  Doc.,  V,  305;  Records  and 
Files  of  the  Quarterly  Courts  of  Essex  County,  Mass.,  I,  154,  159; 
Oyster  Bay  Town  Records,  I,  268;  Lyman  Chalkley,  Chronicles  of 
Scotch-Irish  Settlement  in  Virginia,  I,  29;  Alfred  S.  Hudson,  History 
of  Sudbury,  Mass.,  pp.  605-606. 

41  Cf.  Spencer  P.  Mead,  Ye  Historic,  of  Ye  Towne  of  Greervwich, 
p.  60;  Lucius  R.  Page,  History  of  Cambridge,  pp.  223-224. 

42  G.  W.  Chase,  History  of  Haverhill,  pp.  283-284;  Pa.  Historical 
Society,  Collections,  I,  267-268. 


THE  BASIS  OF  REGULATION  13 

tion.43  Legislative  enactments  determined  the  amount  of 
liquor  he  might  sell  at  one  time,  the  character  of  the  amuse¬ 
ments  he  might  offer  in  his  house,  and  the  prices  he  might 
charge  for  his  entertainment.  In  the  New  England  of  the 
seventeenth  century  the  patron  of  the  tavern  could  spend 
only  a  limited  time  “tippling”  unless  he  chanced  to  be  a 
traveller,  in  which  case  he  was  warned  not  to  accompany  his 
thirst-quenching  with  dancing,  loud  singing  or  other  un¬ 
seemly  noise.44  The  host  was  enjoined  to  see  that  his  guest 
did  not  drink  after  nine  o’clock  in  the  evening  or  violate  the 
cardinal  principle  of  self-restraint  by  becoming  “bereaved 
or  disabled  in  the  use  of  his  understanding.”  40  Neither 
townsman  nor  traveller  could  while  away  his  idle  moments 
by  playing  games  of  chance.46  Throughout  New  England 
the  laws  either  forbade  the  sale  of  liquor  on  the  Sabbath, 
or  closed  the  bar  of  the  public-house  during  the  hours  of 
divine  worship. 

Such  restrictions,  for  which  there  was  abundant  precedent 
in  the  regulations  governing  English  ale-houses,  were  not 
peculiar  to  New  England;  nor  can  they  be  explained,  as 
some  writers  have  supposed,  by  a  mere  reference  to  Puritan 
asceticism.  Their  counterpart  is  met  beyond  the  confines  of 
the  Puritan  colonies.  The  dictatorial  Stuyvesant  in  New 
Netherland,  strengthening  certain  ordinances  of  his  pred¬ 
ecessor,  William  Kieft,  antedated  Massachusetts  and  Con¬ 
necticut  in  refusing  the  hospitality  of  the  tavern  to 

*3  In  North  Carolina,  for  instance,  the  Act  of  1715  bound  the 
licensee  to  keep  “this  law  and  all  other  laws  and  statutes  governing  the 
retail  of  liquors  within  the  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain.”  Colonial  Re¬ 
cords  of  North  Carolina,  XXIII,  79-80.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  Vir¬ 
ginia  and  Rhode  Island  empowered  justices  of  the  peace  to  put  in  force 
the  laws  of  England.  Cf.  The  Public  Laws  of  South  Carolina,  I,  15; 
The  Colonial  Records  of  the  State  of  Georgia,  XVIII,  218-224. 

**Mass.  Col.  Doc.,  II,  100-101;  IV,  pt.  i,  40;  Records  of  the  Colony 
of  New  Plymouth,  XI,  222. 

*5  Conn.  Pub.  Rec.,  I,  533. 

46  R.  I.  Col.  Rec.,  I,  185-186. 


14  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

idlers  and  tipplers.  He  forced  the  worthy  Dutch  burghers 
to  put  out  their  pipes  and  go  home,  when  the  curfew  sounded 
the  hour  of  nine.  Although  these  restrictions  were  not  re¬ 
tained  by  the  English,  their  general  tenor  was  preserved  in 
the  Duke  of  York’s  code  of  laws  for  his  new  province.47 
Likewise,  in  the  colonies  south  of  New  York,  the  conditions 
imposed  upon  the  liquor  dealer,  not  unlike  those  of  Massa¬ 
chusetts  Bay,  included  the  prohibition  of  gaming,  dancing 
and  excessive  drinking.  The  statutes  were  clearly  designed 
to  provide  a  legal  sanction  for  the  dominant  theory  that  the 
individual  should  not  be  permitted  to  misuse  a  commodity 
or  institution  intended  for  his  good.  As  the  Puritan  was 
under  an  especially  compelling  concern  to  safeguard  the 
welfare  of  his  fellow-citizens,  he  removed  with  great  care 
numerous  temptations  to  over-indulgence,  but  in  so  doing 
he  was  merely  carrying  one  step  farther  a  policy  which  was 
generally  recognized  throughout  the  colonies. 

Of  special  significance  was  the  definition  of  the  true  func¬ 
tion  of  a  tavern  as  set  forth  in  the  colonial  legislation.  A 
statute  of  New  Jersey,  based  on  English  precedents,  de¬ 
clared  that  taverns,  inns  and  ordinaries  should  be  places  for 
the  accommodation  of  strangers  and  travellers,  the  transac¬ 
tion  of  public  business  and  the  “refreshment  of  mankind  in 
a  reasonable  manner.”  48  In  the  attempt  to  secure  con¬ 
formity  to  such  a  definition  no  error  was  made  on  the  side 
of  inadequate  legislation.  The  records  during  the  seven¬ 
teenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  are  liberally  sprinkled  with 
acts  relating  to  the  character  of  accommodations,  as  well  as 
the  quality  and  price  of  liquors.  The  Maryland  taverner, 
whose  establishment  was  located  near  the  court  house,  was 
obliged  to  provide  “six  good  and  substantial  beds”  and 
“sufficient  warm  covering  for  the  same,”  that  the  dispensers 

17  The  Records  of  New  Amsterdam,  B.  Fernow,  ed.,  I,  4;  Duke  ot 
Yorke’s  Book  of  Laws,  pp.  30-31. 

is  Acts  of  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Province  of  New  Jersey, 
Samuel  Allinson,  editor,  p.  102. 


THE  BASIS  OF  REGULATION 


15 

of  justice  might  not  be  inconvenienced  during  the  sessions.49 
No  licence  could  be  issued  in  New  Jersey  to  any  save  those 
who  possessed  two  spare  beds  and  sufficient  accommodations 
for  the  stabling  and  pasturing  of  horses.  In  Rhode  Island 
the  retailing  of  liquors  was  limited  to  such  houses  as  main¬ 
tained  at  least  one  bed  for  the  convenience  of  travellers. 
With  more  or  less  particularity  each  colony  recorded  the 
kind  of  accommodations  to  be  provided  by  one  serving  the 
public  as  a  tavern-keeper.50 

Not  content  with  careful  attention  to  the  physical  welfare 
of  the  traveller  the  legislators  indulged  in  a  series  of  inter¬ 
esting,  but  frequently  ludicrous,  experiments  to  safeguard 
his  financial  interests.  From  the  first,  the  scarcity  of  liquor 
in  the  New  World,  and  the  operation  of  the  licensing  system, 
tended  to  place  in  the  hands  of  a  few  dealers  in  each  colony 
a  virtual  monopoly.  To  prevent  the  exorbitant  prices 
which  might  result  from  such  a  situation,  the  assemblies 
undertook  the  difficult  task  of  regulating  them.  As  early 
as  September  3,  1634,  an  ordinance  in  Massachusetts,  fol¬ 
lowing  an  act  of  the  reign  of  James  I,  fixed  the  price  of 
beer  at  one  penny  a  quart.51  Virginia  attacked  the  high 
prices  in  1644  by  listing  the  value  of  all  liquors  in  terms  of 
the  accepted  currency,  tobacco.52  Fluctuations  in  the 
tobacco  crop  from  year  to  year  necessitated  an  annual  read¬ 
justment  of  the  published  prices,  which  perplexed  the  legis¬ 
lators  and  irritated  the  liquor  dealers.  Charges  of  unfair 
discrimination  became  common  and  the  retailers  sought 
redress  by  petitioning  the  legislature  to  abandon  the  prac¬ 
tice.53  When  no  relief  was  forthcoming,  the  more  un- 

*°Md.  Arch.,  XXVI,  306. 

so  R.  I.  Col.  Rec.,  I,  441;  Conn.  Pub.  Rec.,  II,  244;  Mass.  Col.  Doc., 
II,  286,  Colonial  Records  of  North  Carolina,  XXIII,  182;  N.  Y.  Col. 
Laws,  V,  583-584;  Hening,  VI,  71-72. 

si  Mass.  Col.  Doc.,  I,  126. 

52  Hening,  I,  287. 

53  76  id.,  I,  521-522. 


16  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

scrupulous,  fearing  to  sell  above  the  legal  rate,  resorted  to 
the  profitable  device  of  fraudulent  measures  and  adulter¬ 
ated  drinks.  As  a  result  the  assembly  was  forced  to  sup¬ 
plement  the  annual  price-lists  with  clauses  against 
“fraudulent  corrupting  and  mixing  of  wines  and  strong 
waters,”  much  after  the  fashion  of  modern  pure  food  legis¬ 
lation.54 

The  possibility  of  encouraging  domestic  production  of 
liquors  by  a  policy  of  price-fixing  appealed  to  the  legislators 
of  both  Virginia  and  Maryland,  but  the  methods  adopted 
were  singularly  well  conceived  to  thwart  the  avowed  purpose. 
Based  on  a  strange  conception  of  the  psychology  of  the 
consumer,  the  law  provided  that  drinks  of  domestic  pro¬ 
duction  should  sell  at  higher  rates  than  those  of  foreign 
origin.  The  Virginia  act  of  1667,  for  instance,  explains 
that  Virginia  “drams”  and  “syder”  have  greater  rates  in 
order  to  encourage  anything  that  is  produced  in  the  prov¬ 
ince.55  Though  such  reasoning  may  have  been  welcomed 
by  the  retailer,  it  contributed  little  to  the  popularity  of 
domestic  drinks.  These  experiments  in  price  regulation, 
however,  are  typical  of  the  attempts  made  by  other  colonies. 
Taken  as  a  whole,  they  comprise  a  curious  record  of  en¬ 
actments,  repeals  and  re-enactments  based  on  the  success 
or  failure  of  the  moment,  with  scant  regard  for  comprehen¬ 
sive  policy  or  fixed  principles.  The  objective  appears  to 
change  with  each  successive  statute,  varying  from  the  desire 
to  curb  excessive  prices  to  an  eager  encouragement  of  liquor 
production.  If  there  is  any  basic  element  present,  it  is  a 
confused  idea,  perhaps  a  by-product  of  the  existing  mercan- 

6*  Hening,  II,  112-113. 

55  Ibid.,  II,  263.  Similarly,  Maryland  in  1671  placed  the  price  of 
foreign  cider,  perry  and  quince  at  one  shilling  a  gallon,  while  the 
domestic  product  was  listed  at  one  shilling  six-pence.  Md.  Arch.,  II, 
295-297. 


THE  BASIS  OF  REGULATION  17 

tile  theory,  that  some  sort  of  regulation  is  better  than 
none.50 

Of  all  the  conditions  imposed  upon  the  liquor  traffic  none 
was  more  important  from  the  social  standpoint  than  the 
prohibition  of  the  sale  of  intoxicants  to  Negroes,  servants 
and  apprentices.  There  was  nothing  novel  about  excluding 
certain  classes  from  the  pleasant  conviviality  of  the  tavern, 
but  the  colonial  restrictions  went  far  beyond  the  English 
practice.  At  the  opening  of  the  eighteenth  century,  Massa¬ 
chusetts  and  Connecticut  forbade  the  licensed  dealer  to 
entertain  apprentices  and  servants,  lest  the  time  belonging 
to  the  master  should  be  spent  in  dissolute  idleness.57  Vir¬ 
ginia  sought  to  keep  the  menial  class  within  bounds  by 
limiting  the  credit  which  the  taverner  might  grant  to  his 
patrons.  This  was  designed  to  control  the  indentured 
servant,  who  often  incurred  such  heavy  debts  during  his 
period  of  servitude  that  on  the  expiration  of  his  indenture 
he  dared  not  face  his  creditors.  As  stated  in  the  act,  the 
inability  of  these  debtors  to  meet  their  obligations  caused 
“many  newly  free  to  run  away  to  the  neighbouring  planta¬ 
tions  to  the  great  disadvantage  of  the  country.”  58  New 
York,  likewise,  protected  the  master’s  interests  by  pro¬ 
hibiting  the  sale  of  strong  liquor  to  any  servant,  while 
Georgia  and  the  Carolinas  placed  a  ban  on  the  sale  of 
intoxicants  to  slaves  unless  the  consent  of  the  owner  was 
obtained.59  These  restrictions,  inspired  in  part  by  the  fear 
of  slave  insurrections  and  designed  to  promote  labour  effi¬ 
ciency,  were  undoubtedly  advantageous  to  master  and  em- 

56  For  miscellaneous  price  regulations,  see  Pa.  Statutes  at  Large, 
II,  222;  Conn.  Pub.  Rec.,  IV,  286-287;  Duke  of  Yorke’s  Book  of  Laws, 
p.  31;  Colonial  Records  of  North  Carolina,  XXIII,  182-185. 

57  Conn.  Pub.  Rec.,  IV,  7. 

58  Hening,  III,  44—45;  Jennings  C.  Wise,  Eastern  Shore  of  Virginia, 
p.  196. 

59  TV.  Y.  Col.  Doc.,  VI,  17;  Colonial  Records  of  Georgia,  XVIII,  126. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


18 

ployer,  but  they  contributed  to  the  rapid  increase  in  the 
number  of  illegal  tippling-houses.  The  conscientious  tavern- 
keeper,  jealous  of  the  good  name  of  his  house  and  eager  to 
entertain  respectable  patrons,  preferred  not  to  extend  his 
hospitality  to  persons  against  whom  the  law  discriminated. 
Apprentices,  indentured  servants  and  Negroes,  therefore, 
sought  out  places  where  they  could  obtain  credit  illegally, 
and  where  they  could  loiter,  gaming  and  drinking,  reasonably 
safe  from  detection.  Many  an  unlicensed  dealer  throve  in 
secluded  corners  of  the  towns,  harbouring  all  sorts  of  ques¬ 
tionable  characters  from  runaway  slaves  to  deserters  from 
the  British  navy.  Complaints  against  these  undesirable 
establishments  were  numerous  during  the  eighteenth  century, 
and  an  enormous  amount  of  legislation  was  enacted  in  the 
hope  of  remedying  an  intolerable  situation.  But,  in  spite 
of  laws  and  threatening  proclamations,  the  law-breakers 
were  able  to  maintain  their  merry  haunts  without  much  fear 
of  constable  or  sheriff.60 

The  colonial  officials  were  not  primarily  interested  in  an 
efficient  administration  of  the  licence  system,  or  in  the  en¬ 
forcement  of  incidental  regulatory  measures.  Their  chief 
concern  was  to  raise  a  revenue  from  the  liquor  traffic.  The 
importations  of  wines  and  distilled  spirits  were  sufficiently 
large  to  make  import  duties  attractive,  and  the  domestic 
production  of  liquor  was  capable  of  enduring  the  burden 
of  excise  taxes  during  the  eighteenth  century.  While  the 
British  colonial  policy  was  still  in  its  formative  period, 
Massachusetts  began  to  defray  a  part  of  its  governmental 
expenses  by  levying  an  ad  valorem  duty  on  wines  and 
spirits.61  With  apparent  disregard  of  the  interests  of  other 
portions  of  the  Empire,  the  duty  was  imposed  on  all 

so  For  example,  Conn.  Pub.  Pec.,  IV,  7;  P.  I.  Col.  Rec.,  VI,  461; 
Documents  and  Records  Relating  to  the  Province  of  New  Hampshire, 
IV,  76;  Colonial  Records  of  Georgia,  XVIII,  218-224. 

01  Mass.  Col.  Doc.,  I,  186. 


THE  BASIS  OF  REGULATION 


19 

commodities,  but  a  revision  of  the  act  in  1648  exempted 
goods  of  the  production  of  England.62  Not  satisfied  with 
the  returns  from  the  customs,  the  General  Court  in  1644 
placed  an  excise  tax  on  all  wine  sold  at  retail  by  licensed 
vintners.63  Later  the  excise  was  extended  to  distilled 
liquors  as  well,  and  was  usually  collected  from  the  retailer 
on  the  basis  of  his  sales.  The  elementary  priciples  contained 
in  these  early  acts  were  applied  with  slight  modifications  in 
all  the  colonies  during  the  next  century.64  The  revenues 
thus  secured  were  used  to  finance  a  wide  range  of  local  and 
provincial  activities,  though  the  largest  appropriations  were 
made  for  defence  of  the  frontier  and  maintenance  of  the 
military  establishment.65  Maryland  chose  to  vote  the 
money  for  “repairing  court-houses  and  prisons,  increasing 
the  salaries  of  justices  and  reimbursing  an  agent  to  repre¬ 
sent  the  province  in  England.”  66  Education  in  Connecticut 
received  a  considerable  forward  impetus  from  the  sums 
accruing  to  the  treasury  in  the  form  of  customs  duties  and 
excise  taxes.  In  1721  a  rector’s  house  was  built  for  Yale 
College,  and  six  years  later  the  assembly  voted  that  the 
rum  revenue  should  be  appropriated  for  one  year  to  the 
“use,  benefit  and  better  support  of  the  said  college,  its 
rector  and  tutors.”  An  act  of  1766  awarded  the  excise 
money  to  the  towns  to  be  used  for  the  benefit  of  the  local 
schools.67  More  common,  however,  was  the  practice  of 
Pennsylvania,  which  set  aside  this  particular  revenue  as  an 
emergency  fund  to  meet  extraordinary  expenses,  thus  insur- 

62  Mass.  Col.  Doc.,  II,  106,  246. 

63  Ibid.,  II,  246. 

64  Conn.  Pub.  Rec.,  I  146;  N.  Y.  Col.  Doc.,  Ill,  217;  Colonial  Records 
of  North  Carolina,  VI,  1113;  Ga.  Col.  Rec.,  Ill,  68-69;  N.  H.  Prov. 
Papers,  III,  819;  Md.  Arch.,  XXVI,  281-283. 

65  N.  H.  Prov.  Papers,  VI,  473;  Colonial  Records  of  North  Carolina, 
XXV,  352. 

66  Act  of  1692,  Md.  Arch.,  XIII,  466. 

67  Conn.  Pub.  Rec.,  VI,  282;  VII,  133;  XII,  463. 


20  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

ing  the  government  against  too  frequent  financial  embarrass¬ 
ment.68 

Although  revenue  production  was  the  primary  purpose  of 
tariffs  and  excise  taxes,  the  regulation  of  commerce  was  by 
no  means  negligible.  If  the  colonial  legislatures  were 
anxious  to  have  their  acts  approved  by  the  Privy  Council, 
they  were  careful  to  conform  to  the  regulations  of  the 
British  colonial  system.  Preferential  treatment  was  ac¬ 
corded  to  liquors  produced  in  Great  Britain,  and  any  devia¬ 
tion  from  the  rule  was  ultimately  brought  to  the  attention 
of  the  offending  colony.  For  example,  in  1718  Robert 
Hunter,  the  liberal  and  public-spirited  governor  of  New 
York,  was  busy  explaining  to  the  Lords  of  Trade  that  the 
provincial  duty  on  wine  did  not  extend  to  importations 
from  Great  Britain.  He  admitted  that  no  specific  exemp¬ 
tion  was  contained  in  the  act,  but  promised  that  a  special 
declaratory  measure  would  correct  the  omission.69  Mary¬ 
land’s  famous  act  of  1704,  imposing  a  duty  upon  rum,  wine, 
brandy  and  Negroes,  expressly  exempted  all  English  ships.70 
While  the  various  colonies  usually  recognized  the  peculiar 
rights  of  the  mother  country,  they  did  not  hesitate  to  erect 
customs  barriers  against  each  other.  The  assembly  of 
Maryland  discovered  in  1694  that  a  great  part  of  the  money 
of  the  province  was  being  carried  into  Pennsylvania  to 
purchase  beer,  rum  and  other  liquors,  much  to  the  detriment 
of  local  enterprises.  In  order  to  discourage  the  practice  a 
tariff  wall  was  erected  against  the  neighbouring  province, 
and  ten  years  later  the  importation  of  beer  and  malt  from 
Pennsylvania  was  totally  prohibited,  that  domestic  malting 

68  Pa.  Statutes  at  Large,  III,  415.  For  suggestions  that  Parliament 
should  create  a  colonial  revenue  from  taxes  on  alcoholic  liquors  to  de¬ 
fray  the  cost  of  a  permanent  civil  and  military  establishment  in  America, 
see  George  L.  Beer,  British  Colonial  Policy,  175^-1765,  pp.  37-42. 

69  N.  Y.  Col.  Doc.,  V,  509. 

70  Md.  Arch.,  XXVI,  349.  Also  Colonial  Records  of  North  Carolina, 
XXIII,  372. 


THE  BASIS  OF  REGULATION  21 

and  brewing  might  be  encouraged  in  Maryland.71  Massa¬ 
chusetts  and  New  Hampshire  waged  a  tariff  war  during 
1721  caused  by  the  northern  province’s  resentment  over  the 
profits  realized  by  Boston  merchants  from  the  rum  and  wines 
shipped  into  its  towns.72  Further  proof  that  each  colony 
desired  to  be  economically  independent  of  its  neighbours  was 
contained  in  the  North  Carolina  act  of  1751,  which  levied 
prohibitory  duties  on  liquor  from  South  Carolina  on  the 
ground  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  colony  were  able  to 
produce  sufficient  quantities  for  their  own  use.73 

The  failure  of  many  laws  of  this  character  to  mention 
malt  liquors  has  led  some  writers  to  conclude  that  there  was 
a  general  tendency  to  favour  mild  beverages  and  encourage 
their  use  in  place  of  ardent  spirits.74  Such  a  conclusion, 
however,  does  not  seem  to  be  warranted  by  the  facts.  In 
the  first  place  malt  beverages  were  an  insignificant  com¬ 
modity  in  the  commerce  of  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth 
centuries  in  comparison  with  wines  and  distilled  spirits. 
No  legislative  body,  therefore,  would  consider  them  an  ideal 
object  of  taxation  from  the  standpoint  of  revenue  pro¬ 
duction.  Furthermore,  the  industries  of  malting  and  brew¬ 
ing  did  not  receive  any  more  attention  from  colonial  law¬ 
makers  than  did  distilling  and  wine-making,  for  laws 
purporting  to  encourage  the  production  of  the  milder  bev¬ 
erages  can  be  matched  by  acts  designed  to  foster  the 
manufacture  of  spirituous  liquors.75  As  has  been  pointed 
out,  the  excise  was  not  a  piece  of  restrictive  legislation,  and 
its  application  cannot  be  regarded  as  an  attempt  to  regulate 
the  drinking  customs  of  the  people.  Indeed,  it  was  applied 
to  beer  and  ale  as  well  as  to  ardent  spirits,  for  the  tapsters’ 

Md.  Arch.,  XXXVIII,  63;  XXVI,  314-316. 

1 2  N.  II .  Prov.  Papers,  III,  819,  827-828. 

73  Colonial  Records  of  North  Carolina,  XXIII,  363-364. 
i*  Cf.  G.  Thomann,  Colonial  Liquor  Laws,  pp.  42-43. 

75  For  examples,  see  Mass.  Col.  Doc.,  I,  258;  Pa.  Statutes  at  Large, 
III,  415. 


22  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

tax,  first  used  in  New  Netherland,  subsequently  became 
popular  in  the  English  colonies  and  malt  liquors  bore  a  part 
of  the  tax  burden.76 

As  the  taxing  power  bore  with  increasing  severity  upon 
the  liquor  traffic,  the  problems  of  the  revenue  collector  grew 
apace.  Smuggling  was  easy  when  customs  officers  were  few 
and  not  overly  sensitive  in  regard  to  their  duties,  a  fact 
which  was  reflected  in  the  slowly  mounting  revenues  from  a 
rapidly  expanding  commerce.77  Inasmuch  as  honest  im¬ 
porters  and  the  public  treasury  suffered  from  such  a  system, 
efforts  were  made  to  detect  those  who  evaded  the  law. 
Special  officers  were  appointed  in  some  colonies  to  supervise 
the  customs  service,  and  the  justices  issued  writs  to  the 
constables,  authorizing  search  of  all  premises  suspected  of 
harbouring  illegal  importations.  Confiscation  of  such  ship¬ 
ments  not  infrequently  increased  the  colony’s  current 
funds.78  Difficult  as  it  was  to  enforce  the  tariff  laws,  the 
collection  of  the  excise  presented  an  even  more  troublesome 
problem.  The  fact  that  this  form  of  tax  had  been  used 
in  England  long  before  the  seventeenth  century  made  it  no 
more  acceptable  to  the  seventeenth  century  colonist  in 
America.  He  regarded  it  as  a  pernicious  form  of  direct 
taxation,  and  bore  it  unwillingly,  even  when  imposed  by  his 
own  representatives  in  the  colonial  assembly.  To  the  re¬ 
tailer  it  signified  the  unpleasant  interference  of  government 
in  private  business,  as  well  as  the  highly  objectionable 
activity  of  spies  and  informers.79  The  consumer  saw  the 
tax  as  a  peculiarly  heavy  burden,  because  it  tended  to  in- 

76  N.  Y.  Col.  Doc.,  I,  424-425;  Pa.  Statutes  at  Large,  II,  105; 
Mass.  Col.  Doc.,  IV,  pt.  ii,  365-366. 

77  H.  A.  Scomp,  King  Alcohol  in  the  Realm  of  King  Cotton,  pp. 
140-144.  Some  interesting  figures  on  the  loss  of  revenue  in  the 
Carolinas  are  cited. 

78  Conn.  Pub.  Rec.,  VI,  224,  282,  350;  Colonial  Records  of  North 
Carolina,  XXIII,  363,  364. 

79  Conn.  Pub.  Rec.,  IV,  249-250;  S.  G.  Arnold,  History  of  the  State 
of  Rhode  Island,  I,  368-369. 


THE  BASIS  OF  REGULATION  23 

crease  the  price  of  an  indispensable  commodity.  This  un¬ 
popularity  of  the  excise  was  manifest  in  numerous  unsuccess¬ 
ful  attempts  during  the  eighteenth  century  to  find  a  device 
which  would  yield  a  maximum  of  revenue  with  a  minimum  of 
friction.80 

One  can  best  understand  the  intimate  relation  between 
regulation  and  revenue  production,  and  the  increasing  im¬ 
portance  of  the  latter,  by  noticing  the  succession  of  statutes 
in  a  single  colony.  New  York,  for  example,  where  the 
English  developed  a  licensing  system  from  the  Dutch  be¬ 
ginnings,  tried  one  plan  after  another  for  almost  a  century. 
Control  by  municipal  authorities  and  county  justices  gave 
way  to  the  ancient  practice  of  farming  out  the  excise  to 
the  highest  bidder.  At  first  this  auction  was  under  the 
supervision  of  the  mayor  and  council  in  New  York  City  and 
Albany,  and  of  the  justices  in  the  various  counties,  but  in 
1714  special  commissioners  were  named  by  the  legislature 
to  administer  the  system  in  certain  designated  districts.81 
Both  arrangements  proving  futile  from  the  standpoint  of 
financial  returns,  a  law  of  1753  sought  to  resolve  the  diffi¬ 
culty  by  establishing  the  minimum  amount  to  be  realized  in 
each  district,  and  by  empowering  the  commissioners  to  license 
all  retailers,  apportioning  the  excise  among  them  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  gross  sales  of  each.82  Though  the  collection 
of  an  adequate  revenue  was  thus  assured,  the  licensing 
system  was  deprived  of  that  slight  semblance  of  restriction 
which  it  had  formerly  possessed.  Since  more  retailers  with 
greater  sales  would  lighten  the  burden  of  each  dealer  and 
facilitate  the  task  of  collection  for  the  commissioners,  the 
test  for  granting  a  licence  came  to  be  not  the  need  of  the 

so  So  widespread  was  the  opposition  to  the  excise  in  Connecticut 
that  an  act  was  passed  in  1756  fining  a  town  £200  if  it  failed  to 
appoint  collectors  for  the  excise.  Conn.  Pub.  Rec.,  X,  451. 

si  Colonial  Laws  of  New  York ,  I,  785-786,  838. 

82  Ibid.,  Ill,  951-957. 


24  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

community,  but  the  exigencies  of  the  excise  situation. 
Differing  from  the  New  York  system  in  particular  details, 
the  other  colonies  revealed  the  same  general  tendency,  which 
may  be  characterized  as  a  growing  insistence  upon  the  ability 
of  the  liquor  traffic  to  contribute  to  the  financial  support 
of  the  government.  The  expenses  of  the  French  and  Indian 
War,  placing  an  added  burden  on  the  colonial  treasuries, 
confirmed  this  tendency,  and  American  finances  during  the 
Revolution  would  have  been  in  worse  plight  than  they  were, 
had  it  not  been  for  the  revenues  from  liquor  taxes. 

The  transition  from  colony  to  state,  which  marked  the 
period  of  the  American  Revolution,  did  not  alter  the  funda¬ 
mentals  of  colonial  legislation.  In  so  far  as  they  were 
applicable,  the  liquor  laws  were  re-enacted  by  the  new  state 
governments,  and  with  minor  variations  remained  in  force 
until  the  early  part  of  the  nineteenth  century.83  While  there 
was  still  a  noticeable  lack  of  uniformity,  certain  features  were 
common  to  all  the  state  laws.  Nowhere  could  intoxicants 
be  sold  legally  except  by  dealers  licensed  under  the  minute 
and  all-inclusive  provisions  of  the  statutes.  The  sale  of 
liquors  was  universally  associated  with  the  business  of  keep¬ 
ing  a  tavern,  but  other  dealers  might  be  licensed.  The 
retailer,  who  did  not  provide  entertainment  for  travellers, 
was  seldom  permitted  by  the  terms  of  his  licence  to  sell  small 
quantities  to  be  drunk  on  the  premises.  His  place  of  busi¬ 
ness  contained  no  bar,  and  his  patrons  were  persons,  unable 
to  buy  large  quantities  from  importers  or  manufacturers, 
who  desired  to  secure  a  gallon  or  less  for  home  consumption. 
The  laws  usually  limited  the  sale  of  drinks  by  draught  to 
the  keeper  of  the  tavern.  The  manufacturer  and  importer 
did  not  come  within  the  provisions  of  the  licence  system,  but 
at  times  special  permits  were  required  from  those  who  sold 
wholesale. 

Although  laws  are  usually  the  reflection  of  current  so- 
83  Scomp,  of.  cit.,  pp.  180-192. 


THE  BASIS  OF  REGULATION  25 

cial  standards,  no  adequate  portrayal  of  the  manners  and 
morals  of  a  people  is  found  between  the  covers  of  statute 
books.  The  legislator,  influenced  by  a  host  of  conflicting 
considerations,  seldom  is  able  to  reproduce  faithfully  the 
popular  attitude  toward  particular  institutions  and  cus¬ 
toms.  Personal  prejudice,  economic  interest  and  political 
expediency  combine  to  render  him  incapable  of  accurately 
judging  the  wishes  of  his  fellows  and  uncertain  in  regard 
to  his  own  motives  for  supporting  specific  bills.  Plis  at¬ 
tempts  to  set  forth  in  lengthy  preambles  the  purposes  of  the 
laws  he  frames  serve  to  confuse  rather  than  to  clarify.  And 
he  cannot  be  certain,  after  his  work  is  finished,  that  those 
who  follow  him  will  interpret  the  statutes  as  he  intended. 
So,  if  the  student  of  colonial  liquor  customs  were  guided 
solely  by  the  legislation  on  the  subject,  he  might  reach  a 
conclusion  far  removed  from  the  realities  of  the  situation. 
His  survey  might  conceivably  convince  him  that  the  Eng¬ 
lish  colonist  in  America  early  formulated  and  consistently 
supported  a  policy  of  hedging  the  liquor  trade  about  with 
such  minute  restrictions  that  it  had  no  opportunity  to  ex¬ 
pand.  A  multitude  of  statutes,  containing  hostile  preambles 
and  heavy  penalties,  might  confirm  the  idea  that  in  the  New 
World  the  use  of  intoxicants  was  condemned  to  a  sure  de¬ 
struction.  Such  was  the  apparent  import  of  numerous  laws, 
but  not  the  real  purpose  of  the  law-makers.  They  agreed 
with  their  fellows  that  liquor  was  generally  beneficial,  that  its 
use  was  constantly  increasing,  and  that,  if  certain  evils  could 
be  remedied,  the  increase  should  be  encouraged  for  the  wel¬ 
fare  of  the  community.  They  sought  to  confirm  the  respect¬ 
ability  of  the  trade  by  regulating  it  for  the  benefit  of  the 
group.  The  dealer  accepted  this  public  interest  in  his  busi¬ 
ness  with  little  protest.  Specific  restrictions  he  frequently 
evaded,  but  with  the  principles  underlying  them  he  did  not 
quarrel.  Apparently,  he  failed  to  see  that  at  some  future 
date  regulation  might  lead  to  the  destruction  of  his  business. 


CHAPTER  II 


GLIMPSES  OF  AN  OLD  ORDER 

From  the  day  in  1642  that  William  Bradford  confided  to 
his  journal  his  astonishment  at  the  growth  of  drunkenness, 
the  use  and  abuse  of  alcoholic  beverages  has  been  an  impor¬ 
tant  factor  in  determining  the  characteristics  of  American 
life.1  John  Winthrop  might  persuade  himself  by  means  of 
a  faultless  syllogism  that  laws  suppressing  immoderate 
drinking  were  wholesome,  but  his  fellow-countrymen  were 
not  ready  to  abandon  customs  which  had  afforded  them  much 
pleasure  under  English  skies.2  Rather,  they  seemed  bent 
on  indulging  themselves  more  freely  in  the  New  World  than 
in  the  Old,  achieving  in  the  process  a  reputation  for  unusual 
devotion  to  the  flowing  bowl.  Their  habits  have  been  as¬ 
cribed  by  their  descendants  to  various  circumstances ;  the 
hereditary  influence  of  a  hard-drinking  Anglo-Saxon  an¬ 
cestry,  the  hardships  and  exposure  of  frontier  life,  the  uni¬ 
versal  contemporary  belief  in  the  medicinal  properties  of 
alcohol  and  the  ascetic  character  of  Puritanism,  which 
forced  the  individual  to  seek  recreation  and  relief  in  the 
joys  of  the  cup.3  Each  explanation  affords  an  opportunity 
for  interesting  speculation ;  but  all  are  significant  because 
they  rest  upon  the  hypothesis  that  excessive  drinking  was 

1  William  Bradford,  History  of  Plymouth  Plantation  (Original  Nar¬ 
ratives  of  Early  American  History),  pp.  363-364. 

2  John  Winthrop,  History  of  New  England  (Savage  edition),  I,  44n. 

s  Charles  F.  Adams,  Three  Episodes  of  Massachusetts  History,  II, 

785-786;  P.  A.  Bruce,  Economic  History  of  Virginia,  II,  231;  Arethusa 
Hall,  Life  and  Character  of  Sylvester  Judd,  pp.  315-316. 

26 


GLIMPSES  OF  AN  OLD  ORDER  27 

the  rule  rather  than  the  exception  during  the  colonial  period. 

Whether  the  hypothesis  be  true  or  not,  the  Puritan 
fathers  seem  to  have  convicted  their  own  generation.  In 
their  opinion  their  fellows  needed  watching.  Intemperance, 
resulting  from  flagrant  abuse  of  nature’s  gifts,  conflicted 
with  Calvinistic  ideas  of  frugality  and  respectability,  which 
had  it  that  liquor  was  given  to  man  for  the  benefit  of  the 
group  and  not  for  the  wasteful  gratification  of  individual 
appetites.  Therefore,  by  moral  precept  and  statutory  pro¬ 
vision,  the  ban  was  placed  upon  drunkenness.  He,  who 
stepped  over  the  shadowy  line  of  moderation,  was  an  outcast 
from  the  community.  His  pathway  was  in  side  streets  and 
back  alleys,  lest  his  presence  offend  his  more  sober  fellows. 
Summary  punishment  was  his  lot  if  he  dared  to  parade  his 
offence  on  the  public  highway.  So  insistent  were  the  mag¬ 
istrates  in  their  early  attempts  to  suppress  over-indulgence, 
that  they  succeeded  in  preserving  for  future  generations  an 
exaggerated  idea,  perhaps,  of  the  extent  of  intemperance. 

Even  the  way  of  the  prospective  transgressor  was  hard 
in  New  England.  Though  possessed  of  the  means  and  the 
inclination  to  drink  to  excess,  he  found  it  difficult  to  ac¬ 
complish  his  purpose.  If  he  repaired  to  the  public-house  for 
his  liquor,  he  was  apt  to  be  watched  carefully  by  some  pub¬ 
lic  officer,  lest  he  violate  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the 
place.  Unless  his  previous  conduct  had  been  good,  he  might 
learn  to  his  sorrow  that  his  name  was  on  the  list  of  those 
denied  the  right  to  purchase  liquor.4  If  he  secured  intoxi¬ 
cants  and  drank  unwisely  and  too  long,  he  was  likely  to  fall 
into  the  clutches  of  the  constable.  His  first  offence  war¬ 
ranted  a  fine,  usually  five  shillings,  or,  in  default  of  payment, 
a  sojourn  of  from  one  to  six  hours  in  the  stocks.5  In  case 

*Mass.  Col.  Doc.,  IV,  pt.  ii,  463;  Conn.  Pub.  Pec.,  II,  282.  Josselvn 
tells  of  the  annoying  vigilance  of  town  officers  in  the  taverns  of  Boston. 
John  Josselvn,  Two  Voyages  to  New  England,  pp.  132-133. 

s  B.  I.  Col.  Pec.,  I,  186;  Conn.  Pub.  Pec.,  V,  5;  Mass.  Col.  Doc., 
Ill,  139;  Laws  of  New  Hampshire,  I,  21. 


28  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

his  tippling  became  habitual,  he  could  be  whipped  or  forced 
to  wear  some  mark  of  his  shame.6  At  the  discretion  of 
the  magistrates  his  kind  were  frequently  put  to  work  on  the 
fortifications  or  assigned  to  some  task  that  would  save  money 
for  the  town.  Thus  the  treasury  was  reimbursed  for  the 
expense  of  justice,  and  the  town  received  service  in  lieu  of 
money  from  a  fine.7 

In  the  middle  Atlantic  and  southern  colonies  the  law¬ 
makers  frowned  as  fiercely  upon  intemperance  as  did  the 
New  Englander.  That  it  might  be  less  difficult  for  the 
justices  to  detect  offenders,  Maryland  in  1639  defined  drunk¬ 
enness  as  “drinking  with  excess  to  the  notable  perturbation 
of  any  organ  of  sense  or  motion.”  8  From  everyone  dis¬ 
covered  in  such  a  state  the  Lord  Proprietor  was  to  receive 
the  usual  fine  of  five  shillings.  If  the  guilty  party  chanced 
to  be  a  servant,  corporal  punishment  or  confinement  in  the 
stocks  for  twenty-four  hours  was  the  penalty.9  The  ex¬ 
perience  of  a  few  years  demonstrated  that  servants  were 
not  the  only  incorrigibles,  and  in  1658  the  suffrage  was 
taken  from  all  free-holders  who  were  convicted  for  the  third 
time.10  None  of  the  neighbouring  colonies  were  quite  so 
severe  in  the  penalties  inflicted,  but  all  provided  a  fine  or  the 
stocks  for  the  first  offence,  and  hard  labour  or  whippings  in 
the  case  of  any  who  indulged  in  repetitions.11  During  the 
eighteenth  century,  however,  the  tendency  was  toward  a 
mitigation  of  the  punishment,  though  the  drunkard  still  re¬ 
mained  under  the  ban  of  social  disapproval. 

«  Mass.  Col.  Doc.,  I,  112.  A  scarlet  D  was  sometimes  worn  by  the 
habitual  drunkard. 

1 1bid.,  I,  108. 

s  Md.  Arch.,  I,  53. 

9  Md.  Arch.,  I,  159. 

19  Ibid.,  I,  375. 

11  Pa.  Statutes  at  Large,  II,  99;  Allinson,  Acts  .  .  .  of  New  Jersey,  p. 
3;  Hening,  I,  126,  167;  Colonial  Records  of  North  Carolina,  XXIII, 
173-174. 


GLIMPSES  OF  AN  OLD  ORDER  29 

It  is  doubtful  whether  these  laws  were  as  strictly  enforced 
in  the  plantation  provinces  as  in  the  Puritan  colonies.  In 
the  easy  social  intercourse  of  the  “cavalier”  South  there  was 
not  that  compelling  concern  for  the  behaviour  of  the  other 
fellow  that  so  generally  permeated  New  England  thought 
and  action.  The  authorities  were  more  apt  to  be  lenient  in 
their  application  of  the  law  than  the  stern  magistrates  to 
the  north  of  them.  Besides,  had  the  officials  of  Maryland, 
Virginia,  and  the  Carolinas  been  ever  so  vigilant,  they  would 
not  have  been  able  to  equal  the  ease  with  which  officers  in 
the  northern  towns  detected  offenders.  Take  North  Caro¬ 
lina  as  an  example.  According  to  the  law  of  that  colony, 
a  person  could  be  convicted  of  drunkenness  only  if  seen  by 
a  justice  of  the  peace  or  on  the  oath  of  one  or  more  witnesses 
to  the  fact,  and  the  information  was  worthless  oinless  pre¬ 
sented  within  ten  days  of  the  offence.  In  view  of  the  sparsely 
settled  character  of  the  colony,  the  great  distances  and 
the  difficulties  of  communication  in  the  early  part  of  the 
eighteenth  century,  it  is  probable  that  many  escaped  even 
the  most  conscientious  servants  of  the  law.  In  the  more 
populous  colony  of  Virginia  conditions  seem  to  have  been 
different.  Proof  that  drunkenness  was  severely  dealt  with 
during  the  seventeenth  century  has  been  set  down  by  the 
most  distinguished  student  of  the  social  life  of  the  colony.12 
His  numerous  citations  from  the  records  of  the  county  courts 
closely  resemble  the  entries  in  the  early  records  of  the 
Massachusetts  General  Court,  when  almost  every  session 
witnessed  several  presentments  for  intemperance.13  Al¬ 
though  these  entries  do  not  reveal  the  true  state  of  enforce¬ 
ment,  they  are  sufficient  to  indicate  that  the  law  against 
drunkenness  was  not  a  dead  letter. 

In  the  aggregate  the  evidence  of  prosecutions  for  intem- 

12  P.  A.  Bruce,  Institutional  History  of  Virginia,  I,  39-40. 

13  Mass.  Col.  Doc.,  I,  98-100  et  seq;  Records  and  Files  of  the  Quarter 
Courts  of  Essex  County,  Mass.,  I,  134-136,  150-152,  154-157. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


30 

perance  seems  to  constitute  an  impressive  indictment  against 
the  sobriety  of  the  American  colonist.  There  are  witnesses, 
however,  to  answer  the  accusation.  Governor  Berkeley  did 
not  hesitate  to  inform  the  Commissioners  for  Foreign  Planta¬ 
tions  that  he  considered  the  Virginia  planters  generally 
more  temperate  than  the  English  gentlemen.14  John 
Winthrop  recorded  with  evident  satisfaction  the  circum¬ 
stances  of  a  great  training  at  Boston  in  1641,  when  1200 
men  drilled  for  two  days  without  one  case  of  drunkenness 
being  observed,  although  the  supply  of  wine,  small  beer  and 
other  liquors  was  abundant.15  An  observer  of  Massachusetts 
life  during  the  middle  years  of  the  same  century  found  little 
evidence  of  intemperance  even  in  the  busier  towns  of  the 
seaboard.10  As  late  as  1686  Judge  Samuel  Sewall,  who  was 
extremely  sensitive  to  every  public  disturbance,  could  write 
of  a  few  townsmen  who  had  become  boisterous  over  their 
drinks  that  such  high-handed  wickedness  had  hardly  been 
heard  of  before  in  Boston.17  Doubtless  there  were  similar 
convivial  parties  of  which  the  worthy  judge  was  not 
cognizant,  but  they  did  not  make  Boston  a  disorderly  town. 
Indeed,  against  the  dark  background  of  conditions  in  Eng¬ 
land  during  the  early  decades  of  the  eighteenth  century,  town 
life  in  America  stood  out  as  a  model  of  orderliness  and 
sobriety.  It  was  the  time  when  residents  of  England’s 
greatest  city  feared  to  venture  abroad  after  dark  unless 
protected  by  armed  retainers,  for  gangs  of  drunken  ruffians 
roamed  the  dark  streets  at  night,  setting  upon  all  they 
met,  not  even  excepting  the  officers  of  the  watch.  Young 
men  of  the  nobility,  as  well  as  servants  and  apprentices, 
committed  wanton  outrages  upon  sober  citizens  writh  entire 
impunity.  Drunkenness  was  characteristic  of  the  lawless 

i*  P.  A.  Bruce,  Social  Life  of  Virginia,  p.  178. 

is  Winthrop,  op.  cit.,  II,  49-50. 

is  Thomas  Leehford,  Plain  Dealing,  p.  69. 

ii  Diary  of  Samuel  Sewall,  M.  H.  S.  Collections,  Fifth  series,  V,  151. 


GLIMPSES  OF  AN  OLD  ORDER  31 

element,  and  was  manifest  to  the  most  disgusting  de¬ 
gree.18  The  colonies  were  sober  and  decorous  by  compar¬ 
ison.  No  bands  of  the  irresponsible  or  vicious  made  the 
streets  of  Charleston  or  Williamsburg  or  New  Haven 
a  terror  for  the  late  straggler.  True,  there  was  little  ac¬ 
tivity  after  candle-light,  but  no  one  who  chanced  to  be 
abroad  at  night  was  in  much  danger  of  molestation.  The 
immediate  descendants  of  Judge  Sewall  would  have  been  as 
surprised  as  he  at  any  unseemly  disturbance  in  Boston. 

But  the  eighteenth  century  was  not  many  years  old,  when 
a  change  came  over  colonial  drinking  customs.  It  was 
caused  largely  by  the  increasing  popularity  of  distilled 
spirits  in  general,  and  rum  ’in  particular.  The  earliest 
settlers  had  brought  to  the  New  World  a  decided  preference 
for  wines  and  malt  liquors,  a  preference  which  they  sought 
to  gratify  by  domestic  production  of  their  favourite  drinks, 
thus  supplementing  or  replacing  importations  from  Eu¬ 
rope.19  Skill  was  required  in  the  making  of  palatable  ale  or 
beer,  and  good  brewers  and  maltsters  were  greatly  in  de¬ 
mand  in  all  the  settlements.20  Malt  houses  were  early 
established  in  New  England,  but  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the 
towns  encouraged  them,  successful  maltsters  were  few.  The 
consequent  scarcity  of  high  quality  malt  was  a  constant 
handicap  to  the  brewing  industry.21  That  substitutes  were 
frequently  used  with  some  success  is  indicated  by  an  opti¬ 
mistic  stanza  of  the  period : 

If  barley  be  wanting  to  make  into  malt, 

We  must  be  content  and  think  it  no  fault, 

is  W.  E.  H.  Lecky,  A  History  of  England  in  the  Eighteenth  Century, 
I,  478-483. 

ie  See  the  chapter  “Old  Colonial  Drinks  and  Drinkers”  in  Alice  M. 
Earle,  Customs  and  Fashions  in  Old  New  England. 

20  See,  for  instance,  the  request  for  brewers  from  the  Virginia  planta¬ 
tions  in  1609  and  1610.  Alexander  Brown,  The  Genesis  of  the  United 
States,  I,  353,  356. 

21  For  example,  Joseph  B.  Felt,  Ipswich,  Essex  and  Hamilton,  p.  97. 


32  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

For  we  can  make  liquor  to  sweeten  our  lips. 

Of  pumpkins,  and  parsnips,  and  walnut-tree  chips.22 

Although  'Virginia,  Maryland  and  New  England  supple¬ 
mented  domestic  production  by  importations  of  barley  and 
beer  from  the  Dutch  settlements  on  the  Hudson  and  the 
Delaware,  the  supply  of  malt  liquors  was  not  adequate  to 
meet  the  growing  demand.23 

Many  of  the  colonists  were  confident  that  in  time  the  New 
World  would  surpass  the  Old  in  the  production  of  choice 
wines.  French  vine-growers  were  sent  to  Virginia  in  1621 
by  the  London  Company  to  instruct  the  people  in  the  cultiva- 
tian  of  grapes.24  Their  efforts  seem  to  have  been  futile, 
for  forty  years  later  Thomas  Woodward,  surveyor  of  Albe¬ 
marle  County  in  Carolina,  estimated  that,  if  the  Virginians 
had  been  able  to  produce  their  own  wines,  they  would  have 
possessed  a  greater  per  capita  wealth  than  that  of  the  most 
opulent  country  in  Europe.  Woodward,  accordingly,  en¬ 
couraged  the  Carolina  proprietors  in  their  purpose  to  make 
the  colony  a  wine-producing  country.25  Wild  grapes  grew 
in  such  abundance  in  Georgia  that  the  trustees  endeavoured 
to  establish  viticulture.  Cuttings  of  malmsey  from  Madeira 
and  tubs  of  vines  from  Burgundy  were  sent  to  ambitious 
land-holders  in  the  colony.20  Although  a  few  succeeded  in 
cultivating  the  vines  and  making  a  sweet  wine,  many  found 
the  experiment  decidedly  unprofitable  after  the  expiration  of 
a  few  years.27  Faith  in  the  ultimate  success  of  such  proj¬ 
ects  still  persisted,  however,  for  in  1700  the  Earl  of  Bello- 
mont  assured  the  Lords  of  Trade  that  it  was  possible  to 

22  Scomp,  op.  cit.,  p.  42. 

23  N.  Y.  Col.  Doc.,  I,  436,  II,  211;  N.  C.  Col  Rec.,  I,  714. 

2*  Lyon  G.  Tyler,  The  Cradle  of  the  Republic,  p.  169;  Bruce,  Economic 
History  of  Virginia,  I,  243-245. 

23  Shaftesbury  Papers,  N.  C.  Col.  Rec.,  I,  101. 

26  Oa.  Col.  Rec.,  I,  96,  234. 

27  Ga.  Col.  Rec.,  V,  347,  500. 


GLIMPSES  OF  AN  OLD  ORDER  33 

produce  enough  wine  in  the  continental  colonies  to  supply 
all  the  dominions  of  the  Crown.  He  cited  as  evidence  the 
wild  grapes  which  grew  in  great  profusion  along  the  Hudson 
River  and  were  palatable  in  spite  of  their  wildness.  The  suc¬ 
cessful  French  vineyards  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Montreal 
convinced  him  that  New  York  was  not  too  far  north.  Be¬ 
sides,  he  had  tasted  wine  produced  in  the  Narragansett 
country  in  Rhode  Island,  where  the  climate  was  not  unlike 
that  of  the  upper  Hudson  valley.28  But  Bellomont’s  en¬ 
thusiasm  was  not  vindicated  by  actual  results.  Although 
groups  of  Palatine  refugees,  expert  vine-dressers,  were 
settled  in  Virginia,  the  Carolinas  and  along  the  Hudson 
during  the  eighteenth  century,  natural  handicaps  of  climate 
and  soil  were  too  much  for  their  skill,  and  native  wines 
seldom  replaced  the  imported  on  the  colonial  gentleman’s 
table. 

One  drink  of  domestic  production  that  achieved  a  well- 
merited  popularity  was  apple-cider.  Foreign  travellers 
found  that,  if  properly  served,  it  ranked  with  the  best  drinks 
to  which  they  were  accustomed.  Wherever  they  journeyed 
from  Boston  to  Savannah,  it  was  served  by  their  hosts  and 
at  the  public  inns.  In  1663  Josselyn  enjoyed  it  spiced  and 
sweetened  with  sugar  at  the  tap-houses  in  Boston.29  Hugh 
Jones  declared  that  the  Virginia  beverage  was  not  much  in¬ 
ferior  to  Herefordshire,  if  kept  until  the  proper  age,  but 
no  one  seemed  able  to  keep  it,  for  the  planters  were  too  good 
companions  and  hosts  while  the  cider  lasted.30  The 
Labadist  missionaries,  Dankaerts  and  Sluyter,  considered 
the  New  York  cider  the  best  they  encountered  during  their 
travels  in  1679  and  1680.31  During  the  seventeenth  century 
the  New  England  colonies  produced  the  greatest  quantities 

28  N.  7.  Col.  Doc.,  IV,  787-788. 

29  Josselyn,  op.  cit.,  p.  145. 

80  Hugh  Jones,  The  Present  State  of  Virginia,  p.  41.  Originally 
published  in  London  in  1724. 

3i  Journal  of  Jasper  Dankaerts  (Original  Narratives),  p.  66. 


34  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

of  the  beverage.  Henry  Wolcott  of  Windsor,  Connecticut, 
had  an  extensive  orchard  from  which  he  annually  secured 
nearly  five  hundred  small  hogsheads  of  cider.32  In  1648, 
when  he  began  to  sell,  the  price  was  2s.  8d.  a  gallon,  but 
thirty  years  later  production  had  so  increased  that  he  was 
forced  to  sell  at  10s.  a  barrel.  The  constant  addition  of 
new  orchards  with  the  attendant  increase  in  production  sent 
the  price  down  still  further,  till  in  1700  anything  above  6s. 
a  barrel  was  considered  a  fair  return.33 

Although  the  use  of  cider  became  universal,  imported  wines 
were  quite  as  much  in  demand  among  those  who  could  afford 
them.  Madeira  was  the  favourite,  while  next  in  popular 
esteem  came  port,  canary,  claret,  burgundy  and  other  French 
wines.34  Brandy,  malaga  and  sherry,  the  Spanish  sack 
which  Shakespeare  praised  and  drank  at  the  Mermaid  in 
Cheapside,  enjoyed  a  limited  vogue  in  the  colonies.  In  fact 
almost  every  wine  of  merit  was  to  be  found  on  the  tables  of 
the  wealthier  classes  and  in  the  bars  of  the  more  pretentious 
taverns.35  Though  individual  tastes  differed,  people  of 
fortune  in  New  England  were  generally  partial  to  canary  in 
preference  to  the  harsher  madeira,  which  was  so  favourably 
received  in  the  middle  Atlantic  and  southern  colonies.36  It 
was  a  bottle  of  canary  upon  which  Judge  Sewall  relied  to  win 
the  favour  of  his  lady  love,  and  he  was  pleased  when  his 
preference,  canary  or  burgundy,  was  served  to  the  guests 

32josselyn,  op.  cit.,  p.  145. 

33  Judd,  History  of  Hadley,  p.  66. 

3*  Peter  Kalm,  Travels  in  North  America,  I,  257 ;  Israel  Acrelius, 
Description  of  the  Present  Condition  of  the  Swedish  Churches,  p.  160; 
“Journal  of  Lord  Adam  Gordon,”  Travels  in  the  American  Colonies, 
N.  D.  Mereness,  ed.,  p.  406. 

35  W.  B.  Weeden,  Economic  and  Social  History  of  New  England, 
II,  586;  Bruce,  Economic  History  of  Virginia,  II,  215-216. 

s«  C.  M.  Andrews,  Colonial  Folkways  (The  Chronicles  of  America), 
pp.  107-108;  Hugh  Jones,  op.  cit.,  p.  52;  James  Birket,  “Some  Cursory 
Remarks,”  Travels  in  the  American  Colonies,  p.  10. 


GLIMPSES  OF  AN  OLD  ORDER  35 

at  the  weddings  he  attended.37  But  the  New  Englander’s 
taste  was  not  infallible.  So  Josiah  Quincy  discovered  when 
he  visited  Virginia  and  the  Carolinas  in  1773.  At  Charles¬ 
ton  he  found  the  richest  wines  he  had  ever  tasted  and  thought 
them  better  than  the  varieties  commonly  served  in  Massa¬ 
chusetts.38  Peter  Kalm,  the  Swedish  naturalist,  and  Adam 
Gordon,  the  Scotch  peer,  were  equally  generous  in  their 
praise  of  the  superior  vintages  possessed  by  the  hospitable 
merchants  and  planters  southwest  of  the  Hudson.39  Kalm 
was  particluarly  interested  in  the  native  wines,  which  were 
still  in  the  experimental  stage  as  late  as  the  middle  of  the 
eighteenth  century.  In  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland  he 
drank  excellent  beverages  made  from  blackberries,  cherries 
and  wild  grapes,  but  he  considered  peach-brandy,  used  exten¬ 
sively  in  all  the  colonies,  “not  good  for  people  who  have  a 
more  refined  taste,  but  only  for  the  common  kind  of  people, 
such  as  woi'kmen  and  the  like.”  40  Burnaby  thought  that  the 
imitation  burgundy  of  Maryland  production,  which  he  drank 
at  the  table  of  Governor  Hamilton  of  Pennsylvania,  was  not 
bad  “for  the  first  tryal.”  41 

An  excellent  idea  of  the  customary  drinks  of  colonial  days 
can  be  gained  from  a  list  carefully  compiled  by  Israel  Acre- 
lius,  provost  of  the  Swedish  churches  in  America,  while 
making  a  survey  of  the  congregations  under  his  control. 
Since  he  had  an  excellent  opportunity  to  observe  the  every¬ 
day  habits  of  the  communities  he  visited,  his  record,  dated 
1759,  is  unusually  complete.  Over  thirty  drinks,  well-known 
at  the  time,  are  listed  and  described.  Besides  the  wines 

37  Diary,  III,  301,  364. 

33  “Journal  of  Josiah  Quincy,  Jr.,”  M.  E.  S.  Proceedings,  XLIX,  443, 
448,  464. 

39  Travels  in  the  American  Colonies,  p.  400;  Kalm,  op.  cit.,  I,  87. 

40  Kalm,  op.  cit.,  I,  87,  95. 

41  Andrew  Burnaby,  Travels  through  the  middle  settlements  in  North 
America,  1759-1760,  pp.  70-71. 


36  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

already  noticed,  a  number  of  mixed  drinks  are  mentioned ; 
punch,  flip,  sling,  mead  and  sillibub.  The  latter,  made  by 
adding  milk  and  sugar  to  wine,  was  long  a  favourite  as  a 
cooling  beverage  in  the  summer-time.  Punch  usually  con¬ 
sisted  of  lemon  or  lime  juice,  spices,  and  Jamaica  spirits, 
diluted  with  sweetened  water.  It  was  the  popular  drink  for 
all  social  gatherings  at  which  the  thirst  of  a  large  number 
had  to  be  satisfied.  Flip  and  sling  were  variations  of  a  sin¬ 
gle  ingredient,  Jamaica  or  New  England  rum.  The  former, 
containing  small  beer,  rum  and  brown  sugar,  was  served  after 
a  hot  poker  had  been  thrust  in  to  give  it  a  bitter  flavour, 
while  the  latter  was  a  simple  concoction,  half  rum  and  half 
water,  sweetened  to  the  taste.  Mead,  of  ancient  fame  in 
England,  was  prepared  by  allowing  honey  and  water  to 
ferment.  For  milder  beverages  the  colonists  had  a  strong 
beer  of  American  brew,  porter  and  bottled  beer  from  Eng¬ 
land,  and  a  fermentation  of  honey  and  yeast,  known  as 
metheglin.42 

More  significant  than  any  enumeration  of  choice  drinks 
is  the  revelation  contained  in  Acrelius’  list  that  rum  had 
become  the  chief  stimulant  for  many  Americans.  When 
the  New  England  trade  with  Barbados  commenced,  shortly 
after  1650,  the  product  of  the  colonists’  small  stills  or 
“limbecs”  was  supplanted  by  a  more  satisfying  distillation 
from  the  West  Indies.43  Molasses,  brought  by  adventurous 
traders  from  England’s  island  possessions  to  the  energetic 
merchants  of  Connecticut  and  Massachusetts,  supplied  the 
ingredient  necessary  for  a  large-scale  production  of  rum. 
Although  the  New  England  liquor  never  equalled  that  of  the 
West  Indies,  it  was  produced  more  cheaply  and  soon  became 
popular  in  all  the  colonies.  Men,  engaged  in  the  hard  labour 
of  forest  and  field,  and  fisher-folk,  constantly  following  the 

*2  Acrelius,  op.  cit.,  pp.  160-163. 

43  Judd,  op.  cit.,  p.  66;  Conn.  Pub.  Rec.,  I,  322. 


GLIMPSES  OF  AN  OLD  ORDER  37 

sea,  demanded  a  strong  stimulant  to  lighten  the  burden  of 
their  exacting  toil.  The  effect  of  a  diet  consisting  chiefly 
of  salt  meat  did  not  tend  to  discourage  the  consumption  of 
distilled  spirits.  As  the  demand  for  rum  increased,  more 
merchants  ventured  to  risk  their  surplus  in  the  business  of 
distilling,  till  almost  every  important  town  possessed  a  still- 
house  of  its  own.  Some  manufactured  solely  for  local  con¬ 
sumption,  but  larger  establishments  were  not  lacking  in  the 
important  trade  centres  of  Rhode  Island,  Connecticut  and 
Massachusetts.  Newport,  during  the  eighteenth  century, 
grew  rich  from  its  distilleries,  and  the  product  of  the  Med¬ 
ford  firms  was  far-famed  for  its  quality.  While  the  industry 
was  largely  concentrated  in  the  New  England  colonies,  New 
York,  Pennsylvania  and  the  Carolinas  boasted  establish¬ 
ments  able  to  compete  with  the  northern  distillers.44  Phila¬ 
delphia  rum  was  pronounced  as  good  as  the  New  England 
product  and  commanded  an  equal  price  in  the  American 
market.  New  York  City  combined  distillation  with  sugar 
refining,  which  had  grown  to  be  the  most  important  ele¬ 
ment  in  its  industrial  life.45  Indeed,  the  multiplication  of 
distilleries  was  responsible  for  the  change  which  came  over 
colonial  industry  during  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  a  change  marked  by  notable  social  and  economic 
consequences. 

Whether  spirituous  liquor  was  of  domestic  or  foreign 
origin,  it  penetrated  deeply  into  the  social  life  of  Americans. 
Rum  seemed  to  be  ubiquitous.  It  was  found  in  the  finest 
tavern  and  the  vilest  road-house.  The  traveller  seldom 
journeyed  far  enough  to  escape  it,  even  in  the  mountains  of 
the  frontier.  People  of  fortune  kept  a  stock  of  good  quality 

44Weeden,  op.  cit.,  II,  501;  J.  M.  Usher,  History  of  the  Town  of 
Medford,  p.  431;  N.  C.  Col.  Rec.,  VIII,  496. 

*SJ.  F.  Watson,  Annals  of  Philadelphia,  I,  238-239;  Burnaby,  op.  cit., 
p.  110;  N.  Y.  Col.  Doc.,  VI,  511. 


38  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

in  their  homes,  while  the  servant  and  common  labourer  re¬ 
garded  it  as  indispensable.46  Parents  gave  it  to  children 
for  many  of  the  minor  ills  of  childhood,  and  its  wholesome¬ 
ness  for  those  in  health,  it  appeared,  was  only  surpassed 
by  its  healing  properties  in  case  of  disease.47  No  other 
element  seemed  capable  of  satisfying  so  many  human  needs. 
It  contributed  to  the  success  of  any  festive  occasion  and  in¬ 
spirited  those  in  sorrow  and  distress.  It  gave  courage  to 
the  soldier,  endurance  to  the  traveller,  foresight  to  the 
statesman,  and  inspiration  to  the  preacher.  It  sustained 
the  sailor  and  the  plowman,  the  trader  and  the  trapper. 
By  it  were  lighted  the  fires  of  revelry  and  of  devotion.  Few 
doubted  that  it  was  a  great  boon  to  mankind. 

Along  with  milder  liquors,  rum  served  as  a  pleasing 
beverage  for  special  occasions.  No  child  was  properly 
christened  unless  all  present  drank  to  the  health  and  future 
prosperity  of  the  infant.  At  weddings  the  tankards  passed 
from  hand  to  hand,  and  mugs  or  tumblers  were  frequently 
filled  with  punch,  liberally  seasoned  with  Jamaica  spirits. 
The  gentlemen  enjoyed  the  customary  race  for  a  choice 
bottle  of  wine,  which  the  winner  was  privileged  to  present  to 
the  bride.48  The  time-honoured  practice  of  serving  drinks 
to  the  mourners  at  a  funeral  was  almost  universally  observed, 
though  occasionally  some  sterner  soul,  fearful  lest  un¬ 
seemly  levity  mar  the  last  sad  rites,  left  instructions  in  his 
will  that  no  intoxicants  should  be  provided.49  Church,  as 
well  as  home  festivities,  were  made  the  merrier  by  reason  of 

Birket,  op.  cit.,  p.  11;  Records  of  the  Court  of  New  Castle,  Pa., 
p.  351. 

47  “William  Logan’s  Journal”  (1745),  Pa.  Mag.,  XXXVI,  3-5. 

4»  Helen  E.  Smith,  Colonial  Days  and  Ways,  pp.  171-172;  Diary  of 
Samuel  Sewall,  II,  18;  W.  S.  Bartlett,  A  Memorial  of  Reverend  Jacob 
Bailey,  p.  10. 

49  H,  M.  Jenkins,  Historical  Collections  of  Owynedd,  p.  389;  H.  S. 
Nourse,  The  Early  Records  of  Lancaster,  Mass.,  p.  154;  Bruce,  Econo¬ 
mic  History  of  Virginia,  II,  217;  Md.  Arch.,  IV,  108;  Felt,  Ipswich, 
Essex  and  Hamilton,  pp.  198-199. 


GLIMPSES  OF  AN  OLD  ORDER 


39 

the  “good  creature.”  The  building  of  a  new  edifice,  the 
installation  of  new  pews,  and  especially  the  ordination  of  a 
new  minister  were  occasions  when  slight  restraint  was  placed 
upon  the  appetite.50  In  Boston  John  Vyall  was  requested 
to  keep  a  house  near  the  Second  Church  that  thirsty  sinners, 
going  to  hear  John  Mayo  or  Increase  Mather  preach,  might 
be  satisfied.51  The  vestries  of  certain  Episcopalian  churches 
met  at  the  tavern,  where  the  chief  business  transacted  was 
the  consumption  of  good  rum  at  the  expense  of  the  congre¬ 
gation.52  To  the  tavern  also  resorted  the  town  selectmen 
and  the  county  justices  that  the  business  of  government 
might  have  the  benefit  of  the  clarifying  influence  of  ardent 
spirits.53  There  over  a  bowl  of  toddy  or  a  mug  of  flip 
matters  of  local  and  colonial  concern  were  decided,  and  civil 
and  criminal  cases  were  heard. 

In  its  intimate  relation  to  the  interests  and  activities  of 
the  community,  the  tavern  was  the  most  significant  factor 
in  the  colonial  liquor  traffic.  Though  there  was  a  vast 
difference  in  architectural  form  between  the  stately  “King’s 
Arms”  in  Boston  and  the  rude,  wooden  shack,  which  served 
as  a  public-house  in  the  back  country  of  North  Carolina, 
both  were  symbols  of  an  influence  widely  felt  in  eighteenth 
century  America.  They  represented  not  only  the  perform¬ 
ance  of  a  public  service  for  private  profit,  but  also  the 
strengthening  of  bonds  of  unity  within  and  between  com¬ 
munities.  As  centrally  located  as  either  the  town-hall  or 
the  meeting-house,  the  tavern  in  New  England  served  as  a 

so  Alice  M.  Earle,  The  Sabbath  in  Puritan  New  England,  pp.  269- 
270;  “Letters  of  Jonathan  Boucher,”  Md.  Hist.  Mag.,  VII,  14;  C.  C. 
Coffin,  History  of  Boscawen  and  Webster,  pp.  30-31. 

si  W.  R.  Bliss,  Side  Glimpses  from  the  Colonial  Meeting  House, 
pp.  13-14. 

52  Letter  of  John  Urmston,  N.  C.  Col.  Rec.,  I,  765-770. 

53  R.  I.  Col.  Rec.,  V,  267 ;  Babson,  History  of  Gloucester,  pp.  316- 
317;  History  of  Carroll  County,  N.  Y.,  Georgia  D.  Merrill,  editor, 

p.  60. 


40  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

sort  of  community  centre,  housing  in  cases  of  emergency  the 
worshipping  congregation  or  the  voters  assembled  for  town¬ 
meeting.  To  it  came  the  traveller  from  distant  parts, 
bringing  his  welcome  news  of  unusual  occurrences  and  inter¬ 
esting  experiences  of  the  journey,  and  receiving  in  return 
an  account  of  local  happenings  with  which  to  regale  his 
audience  at  the  next  stop.  Town  idlers  loved  to  gather 
on  Saturday  afternoons  in  the  great  room  near  the  bar  and 
listen  to  the  discussions  of  politics,  religion  and  current 
events.  Often  the  conversation  was  of  more  than  passing 
interest,  for  the  politically  prominent  used  these  informal 
gatherings  to  formulate  policies,  select  candidates  for  office 
and  consider  matters  of  moment  in  the  colony.  Such  was 
the  nature  of  the  meetings  at  the  “Raleigh”  in  Williamsburg, 
which  have  forever  associated  that  tavern  with  the  cause  of 
American  independence.54 

Training  days,  county  court  sessions,  town-meetings  and 
convocations  Avere  seasons  of  extraordinary  business  and 
profit  for  the  owner  of  the  public-house.  Those  who  at¬ 
tended  a  muster,  appetite  whetted  by  the  liquor  doled  out  at 
the  officers’  expense,  were  generous  in  their  patronage  at 
the  bar  after  the  day’s  drilling  wTas  finished.  Officers  and 
men  mingled  in  good  comradeship,  while  the  treats  were 
going  round,  and  toasts  were  drunk  to  everyone  in  authority 
from  the  governor  to  the  company  captain.  Newly  ap¬ 
pointed  officers  were  expected  to  “wet”  their  commissions  by 
liberal  purchases  of  liquor  for  the  benefit  of  the  men.  So 
the  preparation  for  military  service  became  a  day  of  social 
jollification  and  for  some  a  time  of  gross  over-indulgence.5D 
Boisterousness,  rowdyism  and  rough-and-tumble  fighting 
were  likewise  characteristic  of  the  crowds  that  assembled  for 

54  Edward  Field,  The  Colonial  Tavern,  passim ;  W.  R.  Bliss,  Colonial 
Times  on  Buzzard’s  Bay,  pp.  123-126;  James  M.  Usher,  op.  cit.,  p.  389; 
Mary  M.  Stanard,  Colonial  Virginia,  p.  151. 

55  Alexander  Hamilton’s  Itinerarium,  A.  B.  Hart,  editor,  pp.  81-82. 


GLIMPSES  OF  AN  OLD  ORDER  41 

the  sessions  of  the  county  court,  and  occasionally  the  temp¬ 
tation  of  the  tavern’s  good  cheer  was  too  much  for  the 
presiding  justices.  The  colonist  journeyed  to  the  county 
seat  on  such  occasions  with  no  idea  of  devoting  his  time 
entirely  to  weighty  matters  of  law  and  business.  Usually 
he  had  travelled  a  considerable  distance  over  roads  that 
made  the  trip  anything  but  pleasant,  and  he  was  bent  upon 
making  merry  for  several  days  as  compensation  for  the 
hardships  of  the  journey.  In  the  South  horse-racing,  cock- 
fighting,  and  wrestling  matches,  mingled  with  much  gambling 
and  hard  drinking,  were  favourite  diversions  after  the  de¬ 
mands  of  justice  had  been  satisfied.  The  convocations  of 
the  clergy,  north  as  well  as  south,  called  for  the  best  liquors 
that  the  local  hostelry  could^  supply,  for  the  clergyman  was 
as  discriminating  as  the  layman  in  the  use  of  intoxicants. 
The  New  England  tavern  was  frequently  located  near  the 
meeting-house  that  visiting  ministers  might  find  comfortable 
lodging  and  a  well-ordered  bar  conveniently  situated.56 

It  was  from  the  tavern,  as  a  rule,  that  the  colonial 
householder  secured  his  supply  of  liquor.  A  few  fortunate 
individuals,  like  Colonel  William  Byrd  of  Virginia,  could 
indulge  their  love  of  conspicuous  consumption  by  importing 
the  best  wines  and  brandies  directly  from  Europe,  but  for 
the  majority  this  was  an  impossibility.57  Often  traders, 
calling  themselves  wholesalers,  purchased  hogsheads  of  rum 
and  spirits  from  the  merchant-importers  in  the  larger  towns 
and  travelled  up  and  down  the  countryside  selling  their  com¬ 
modity  in  five  and  ten  gallon  lots.  Such  a  dealer  was 
Joshua  Hempstead  during  the  first  quarter  of  the  eighteenth 
century.  He  has  left  in  his  diary  a  detailed  statement  of 

56  Hening,  II,  384;  S.  G.  Fisher,  Men,  Women  and  Manners  in 
Colonial  Times,  I,  71;  Watson,  Men  and  Times  of  the  Revolution,  pp. 
261-262;  Chastellux,  Travels  in  North  America,  292-293. 

57  Writings  of  Colonel  William  Byrd,  J.  S.  Bassett,  editor,  pp.  xxxi- 
xxxii. 


42  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

the  manner  in  which  he  supplied  his  Connecticut  neighbours 
with  their  year’s  supply  of  rum,  until  larger  business  in¬ 
terests  took  his  entire  attention.58  Most  families,  however, 
influenced  either  by  loyalty  to  the  local  taverner  or  by  the 
necessity  of  buying  in  small  quantities,  made  their  purchases 
at  the  public-house,  whenever  they  did  not  make  sufficient 
liquor  for  their  own  use.59  In  some  communities  the  profits 
of  the  tavern-keeper  constituted  a  reasonably  accurate  in¬ 
dication  of  the  prosperity  of  the  group. 

Many  writers,  looking  back  upon  the  colonial  period 
through  a  romantic  haze,  have  idealized  the  tavern.  They 
have  described  its  cheerful,  spacious  great-room,  its  commo¬ 
dious  bar,  well-stocked  with  choice  and  popular  beverages, 
and  its  huge,  open  fire-place,  where  the  crackling  of  the 
logs  invited  one  to  while  away  the  long  winter  evenings. 
Here,  they  would  have  us  believe,  gathered  the  wit  and  talent 
of  the  town,  as  well  as  the  interesting  travellers  who  chanced 
to  share  the  hospitality  of  the  genial  host.  Such  public- 
houses  there  were  in  favoured  spots,  but  they  were  few  and 
the  way  was  long  between  them.  John  Dunton  tells  us  that 
jovial  George  Monck  made  the  “Blue  Anchor”  at  Boston  a 
delight  to  the  most  fastidious.  His  place  was  famed  far 
and  wide  for  the  beauty  of  its  special  rooms  and  the  ex¬ 
cellence  of  its  fare.60  Alexander  Hamilton,  the  Maryland 
physician,  closely  observing  manners  and  customs  as  he 
visited  the  northern  colonies  in  1744,  found  much  to  praise 
in  the  New  York  taverns,  though  the  people  frequenting 
them  were  extremely  annoying.61  More  often,  however,  the 
record  left  by  the  critical  traveller  is  a  severe  denunciation 
of  both  taverns  and  tavern-keepers.  Birket  considered  the 

58  “Diary  of  Joshua  Hempstead,”  Nero  London  County  Historical 
Society,  Collections,  I,  passim. 

59  J.  S.  Barry,  Historical  Sketch  of  the  Torcm  of  Hanover,  Mass., 
pp.  171-172. 

John  Dunton,  Letters  from  New  England  (1686),  pp.  86-86, 

6i  Alexander  Hamilton’s  Itinerarmm,  pp.  50,  106-107. 


GLIMPSES  OF  AN  OLD  ORDER  43 

New  England  houses  either  “very  indifferent”’  or  “intol¬ 
erably  dirty,”  and  his  experiences  with  the  proprietors 
caused  him  to  seek  refuge  in  a  private  home  wherever 
possible.62  His  unfavourable  opinion  is  paralleled  by  that 
of  William  Logan  with  regard  to  the  region  south  of 
Pennsylvania.  Called  to  South  Carolina  by  business  inter¬ 
ests,  Logan  rode  down  the  coast  from  New  Jersey  to  Charles¬ 
ton,  noting  in  his  journal  as  he  progressed  the  sort  of 
entertainment  he  encountered  from  day  to  day.  With 
the  exception  of  a  few  good  houses  in  Virginia,  the  farther 
south  he  journeyed  the  worse  he  fared.  “Poor  liquor,” 
“dirty  food”  and  “nasty  rooms”  are  frequent  entries  in  his 
detailed  account  of  the  trip.63  Although  the  accommoda¬ 
tions  were  so  often  unsatisfactory,  the  places  offering  to 
care  for  travellers  were  numerous.  A  group  of  Moravian 
brethren,  making  their  way  through  the  back-country  from 
Bethlehem,  Pennsylvania,  to  Wachovia  in  North  Carolina, 
experienced  little  difficulty  in  1753  in  finding  an  inn  of  some 
sort  during  the  course  of  the  day’s  journey.64  In  the 
sparsely  settled  sections  these  inns  were  usually  nothing 
more  than  a  private  house,  where  the  head  of  the  family 
had  secured  a  licence  that  he  might  exact  legal  rates  from 
his  guests.  One  petitioner  in  western  Virginia  urged  his 
case  on  the  ground  that  he  was  “very  much  infested  with 
travellers”  and  needed  a  licence  to  save  himself  from  their 
impositions.65  Establishments  of  such  a  character  seldom 
pretended  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  the  guest  in  a  business-like 
fashion.  He  shared  what  the  family  ordinarily  enjoyed  in 
the  way  of  food  and  lodging  and  considered  himself  for¬ 
tunate,  if  he  was  not  discriminated  against.  His  host 

62  Birket,  op.  cit.,  pp.  10,  25-26,  81. 

68  ‘William  Logan’s  Journal,”  Pa.  Mag.,  XXXVI,  2,  3-5,  13,  16. 

6*  “Diary  of  a  Journey  of  Moravians,”  Travels  in  the  American  Col¬ 
onies,  pp.  331-334. 

66  J.  N.  Harmon,  Sr.,  Annals  of  Tazewell  County,  Va.,  p.  19. 


44  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

probably  provided  cider,  if  he  was  ambitious  enough  to 
cultivate  an  orchard,  and  a  cheap  grade  of  rum,  pronounced 
by  foreigners  to  be  “execrable  stuff,”  but  which  the  average 
American  drank  with  considerable  satisfaction.66  After 
experiencing  the  accommodations  of  the  western  country,  the 
traveller  was  quite  willing  to  give  the  taverns  of  the  seaboard 
towns  a  more  favourable  report. 

In  the  eastern  communities,  particularly  in  New  England, 
the  host  of  the  public-house  enjoyed  considerable  prestige. 
The  towns  from  the  beginning  presented  men  of  good  repu¬ 
tation  to  be  licensed  by  the  justices,  and  the  tradition 
continued  well  into  the  eighteenth  century.  Cambridge  was 
long  served  at  the  tavern  by  the  most  prominent  deacon  in 
the  church,  and  upon  his  retirement  his  son  succeeded  him. 
The  tendency  to  license  the  same  person  year  after  year 
vested  the  calling  with  a  sort  of  dignity  which  it  otherwise 
would  have  lacked.  The  high  esteem  in  which  the  occupation 
was  held  is  evident  from  the  pages  of  the  early  Harvard 
records,  on  which  the  names  of  students  were  listed  not 
alphabetically,  but  according  to  the  relative  social  position 
of  families.  In  the  class  of  1653  Joshua  Long,  son  of  an 
English  inn-keeper,  precedes  Samuel  Whiting,  whose  father 
was  a  clergyman.  John  Harriman,  son  of  a  prominent  tav¬ 
erner  at  New  Haven,  led  the  class  of  1667,  including  among 
his  social  inferiors  the  son  of  Rev.  Peter  Hobart.  Certainly 
no  more  emphatic  testimony  could  be  given  in  regard  to  the 
social  position  of  the  tavern-keeper  in  the  community.67 
It  was  not  unusual  for  the  town  clerk,  the  deputy  to  the 
General  Court  and  the  justice  of  the  peace  in  Massachusetts 
to  round  off  a  public  career  by  securing  a  licence  to  run  a 

ea  “A  New  Voyage  to  Georgia”  (1737),  Oa.  Hist.  Soc.,  Collections, 
II,  44;  “Narrative  of  George  Fisher”  (1755),  William  and  Mary  College 
Quarterly ,  XVII,  173-174. 

67  F.  B.  Dexter,  “On  Some  Social  Distinctions  at  Harvard  and  Yale,” 
American  Antiquarian  Society,  Proceedings,  October,  1893,  p.  50. 


GLIMPSES  OF  AN  OLD  ORDER  45 

public-house.68  During  the  eighteenth  century,  however, 
the  occupation  lost  caste  rapidly.  Sons  of  tavern-keepers 
failed  to  retain  their  high  rank  on  the  college  rolls  at 
Harvard.  The  courts  began  to  award  licences  with  a 
greater  liberality,  which  meant  a  rapid  decline  in  the  type 
of  men  licensed.  The  position  became  less  a  man’s  job,  as 
many  widows  were  granted  permission  to  keep  public-houses 
that  they  might  not  become  dependent  upon  the  community. 
In  some  localities  persons  of  influence  obtained  licences  and 
then  employed  someone  to  conduct  the  business,  in  order 
that  they  might  escape  responsibility  for  any  unpleasantness 
or  scandal  connected  with  the  trade.  This  practice  became 
common  in  the  middle  and  southern  colonies,  where  the 
respectable  host,  considerate  of  his  good  name,  was  being 
replaced  by  a  horde  of  unscrupulous  keepers  of  rude  huts, 
bent  upon  making  a  maximum  of  profit.69  No  reproach, 
however,  attached  to  the  proprietor  of  a  reputable  house. 
At  the  close  of  the  Revolution  a  considerable  number  of 
officers  sought  to  recoup  their  fortunes,  financially  and 
politically,  by  entering  a  business  that  was  profitable  and 
kept  them  constantly  before  the  public.  In  the  closing 
decade  of  the  century  an  English  visitor  was  impressed  by 
the  number  of  lawyers,  ex-judges  and  former  members  of 
the  legislature  who  kept  tavern  in  New  York  state.  His 
observations  convinced  him  that  the  lawyer  and  the  taverner 
had  found  the  open  sesame  to  riches  and  honour  in  the  newer 
communities  of  the  country.70  Nevertheless,  neither  the 
reflected  glory  of  a  military  reputation,  nor  the  prestige  of 
a  judicial  career  could  restore  the  occupation  to  its  former 
high  place. 

6*  For  example  see  the  lists  in  H.  S.  Nourse,  The  Early  Records  of 
Lancaster,  Mass.,  pp.  334-338;  C.  W.  Baird,  History  of  Rye,  N.  Y., 
p.  150. 

“Narrative  of  George  Fisher,”  pp.  167,  170-171. 

79  John  Harriott,  Struggles  Through  Life,  II,  110,  114,  117. 


46  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

During  the  eighteenth  century  intoxicants  became  a  vital 
element  in  determining  the  course  of  colonial  commerce. 
The  English  settlers  had  early  realized  the  power  of  ardent 
spirits  to  control  the  valuable  Indian  trade.  Though  legal 
restrictions  were  imposed  in  all  the  colonies  to  prevent 
wholesale  debauching  of  the  natives,  desire  for  profits  broke 
through  legal  barriers  and  enterprising  traders  paid  scant 
heed  to  the  morality  or  legality  of  their  methods.  By 
bringing  the  Iroquois  under  their  domination,  the  English  in 
New  York  cleverly  schemed  to  divert  the  fur-trade  of  the 
northern  lakes  from  Montreal  to  Albany.  Indispensable  to 
their  plans  was  rum,  less  tasty  than  French  brandy,  but 
possessing  the  merit  of  cheapness,  which  enabled  the  Indian 
to  secure  a  greater  quantity  in  exchange  for  his  priceless 
bundles  of  beaver  and  mink.  Craftily,  the  English  traders, 
using  their  brand  of  “fire-water”  to  lure  the  northern  tribes, 
despoiled  their  rivals  and  increased  their  own  treasure  of 
furs.  Wherever  the  Indian  had  pelts  for  sale,  there  the 
independent  trader  or  the  merchant’s  agent  might  be  found, 
usually  provided  with  a  stock  of  liquor  as  his  medium  of 
exchange.71  He  preceded  the  settler  into  the  regions  beyond 
the  frontier,  gathering  invaluable  information  along  with 
his  supply  of  furs.  So  devastating,  however,  was  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  ardent  spirits  upon  the  tribes  with  which  he  came 
in  contact,  that  the  colonial  records  are  filled  with  denuncia¬ 
tions  of  unscrupulous  traders  little  better  than  “abandoned 
wretches.” 

Cotton  Mather  blamed  the  traffic  for  the  tragedy  of 
King  Philip’s  War,  and  charged  his  fellow  citizens  with  de¬ 
liberately  debauching  the  red  men.72  A  decade  after  the  war 
Dankaerts  and  Sluyter  encountered  numerous  evidences  of 

7i  Travels  in  the  American  Colonies,  pp.  524—525. 

7^  Mather,  History  of  the  War  with  the  Indians  in  New  England, 
S.  G.  Drake,  editor,  pp.  91,  99,  175—176;  Diary  of  Cotton  Mather, 
[M.  H.  S.  Collections,  Series  vii,  vol.  vii-viii],  I,  342. 


GLIMPSES  OF  AN  OLD  ORDER  47 

the  disastrous  results  which  followed  in  the  wake  of  the 
Indian  trade.73  Conditions  became  so  intolerable  in  some 
sections  that  the  Indians  themselves  were  aroused  to  de¬ 
nounce  the  practice.  In  1738  the  Alleghenies  adopted  a 
plan  of  spilling  all  rum  brought  among  them,  and  seven  years 
later  George  Thomas,  lieutenant-governor  of  Pennsylvania, 
issued  a  proclamation  giving  all  tribes  in  the  province  the 
right  to  destroy  liquor  offered  to  them  for  sale.74  There 
was  published  in  London  during  1754  a  pamphlet  entitled 
Speech  of  a  Creek  Indian  Against  Immoderate  Use  of 
Spirituous  Liquors.  In  eloquent  phrase  this  spokesman  for 
his  nation  pictured  the  artful  manner  in  which  the  English 
had  introduced  ardent  spirits  among  the  Indians,  supplying 
it  plentifully  as  soon  as  its  trade  possibilities  were  under¬ 
stood.  He  passionately  attacked  a  system  which  based 
commercial  profit  upon  the  degradation  of  a  people,  declar¬ 
ing  that  if  the  practice  were  continued  many  decades  longer 
the  Creek  nation  would  perish  from  the  ravages  of  intem¬ 
perance.75  His  accusations  against  the  English  were  sub¬ 
stantiated  a  generation  later  by  the  testimony  of  David 
Tait  after  he  had  travelled  extensively  among  the  tribes 
of  the  southeast.  Desperate  as  Tait  found  the  situation, 
he  realized  that  conditions  would  have  to  become  much 
worse  before  the  desire  for  profits  would  yield  to  higher 
considerations  of  justice.  Too  many  still  believed  with  the 
seventy-two  Albany  merchants  that  any  restriction  on  the 
use  of  rum  in  the  fur-trade  would  end  the  prosperity  of 
those  engaged  in  an  important  branch  of  colonial  com¬ 
merce.76 

But  the  role  of  rum  in  the  Indian  trade  was  less  important, 

73  Journal  of  Jasper  Dankaerts,  pp.  179-180. 

7*  Pa.  Archives,  First  series,  I,  549—550;  Third  series,  VIII,  542-544. 

75  Speech  of  a  Creek  Indian,  pp.  12-14. 

76  2V.  Y.  Col.  Doc.,  VII,  613-615.  A  group  of  Albany  merchants  in 
1764  petitioned  the  Lords  Commissioners  for  Trade  and  Plantations 
against  any  prohibition  of  the  use  of  rum  in  the  trade  with  the  Indians. 


48  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

from  the  standpoint  of  the  economic  interests  of  a  majority 
of  the  colonists,  than  its  moving  power  in  other  forms  of 
commercial  activity.  Its  importance  in  determining  the 
course  of  trade  and  the  development  of  industry  has  been 
clearly  pointed  out  by  Weeden  in  his  Economic  History  of 
New  England.'11  Beginning  with  the  importation  of  the 
first  considerable  quantities  of  molasses  in  1681,  Rhode 
Island  began  to  build  upon  a  foundation  of  rum  distillation 
and  exportation.  In  1723  some  enterprising  merchants  in¬ 
troduced  the  liquor  as  a  substitute  for  French  brandy,  long 
an  element  indispensable  to  the  African  slave-trade,  and  be¬ 
fore  the  middle  of  the  century  Newport  and  Providence  had 
become  the  chief  bases  for  this  trade  in  North  America.78 
Distilleries  at  Medford,  Boston,  Newport,  and  the  large 
establishments  of  James  Brown  at  Providence  supplied  mer¬ 
chants  with  a  commodity  readily  exchangeable  for  gold, 
ivory  and  slaves  along  the  African  coast.79  Governor 
Cranston  reported  that  between  1698  and  1708  over  one 
hundred  vessels  were  built  in  Rhode  Island  to  engage  in  the 
Guinea  trade.  After  1730  the  colony  annually  exported 
1800  hogsheads  of  rum  to  be  exchanged  for  slaves.80  The 
correspondence  of  the  larger  firms  with  their  captains  and 
agents  throws  a  flood  of  light  upon  the  character  of  the 
traffic.  Captain  John  Cahoone,  Jr.,  was  off  the  Guinea 
coast  in  1736,  attempting  to  realize  a  good  profit  from  a 
cargo  of  rum  which  he  had  taken  out  of  Newport  for  Daniel 
Ayrault.  Competition  for  slaves  was  so  keen,  he  wrote  to 
his  employer,  that  he  had  been  able  to  secure  only  twenty- 
seven  in  a  month.  There  were  nineteen  rum  ships,  both 
French  and  English,  in  the  road  at  one  time,  and  the 

77  II,  641,  649. 

78  R.  I.  Col  Roc.,  VI,  380. 

79  Samuel  Hopkins,  Works,  II,  615;  Gertrude  Kimball,  Providenc*  in 
Colonial  Times,  pp.  251-252. 

so  R.  I.  Col.  Rec.,  IV,  191-193,  225,  VI,  380. 


GLIMPSES  OF  AN  OLD  ORDER  49 

regular  stations  for  slaves  were  unable  to  supply  the  demand. 
He  was  taking  any  slaves  that  he  could  get  by  sending  the 
small  boat  ashore  under  supervision  of  the  mate,  who  was  to 
bargain  for  Negroes  wherever  he  had  an  opportunity. 
Sixteen  years  later  David  Lindsay,  sailing  for  Ayrault, 
reported  the  same  conditions  in  regard  to  the  rum  trade. 
He  spent  several  months  securing  61  slaves  and  a  few 
ounces  of  gold,  but  was  forced  to  start  a  return  voyage 
before  he  had  disposed  of  all  his  rum.  In  1755  Wilkinson 
and  Ayrault  of  Newport  sent  Lindsay  with  a  cargo  of  38 
hogsheads  of  rum  to  the  African  coast  under  orders  to  secure 
gold  and  slaves,  the  latter  to  be  sold  in  Barbados,  St. 
Christopher  or  Jamaica  at  not  less  than  £27  a  head.  He 
(was  to  invest  the  proceeds  in  molasses  for  the  New  England 
distilleries.  Newport  was  credited  in  1763  with  twenty 
vessels  which  carried  9000  hogsheads  of  rum  to  the  African 
coast.  The  ventures  were  becoming  less  profitable,  however, 
for  the  price  of  slaves  had  risen  to  250  gallons  of  rum  for 
each  prime  man,81  while  no  proportionate  increase  in  the 
value  of  slaves  was  evident  in  the  West  Indies.  The  agents 
of  Aaron  Lopez,  wealthy  Rhode  Island  merchant,  could 
secure  only  £33  for  prime  Negroes  in  the  British  and  French 
islands  in  1770.  During  the  next  few  years  decreasing 
profits,  re-enforced  by  the  restrictions  of  the  “Association” 
and  the  difficulties  of  war-time,  tended  to  wean  the  New 
England  shippers  from  the  African  trade.82 

Not  all  of  the  product  of  New  England  distilleries  was 
destined  for  the  famous  triangle  of  molasses,  rum  and  slaves. 
As  early  as  1710  Salem  merchants  were  supplying  the 
continental  colonies  with  sugar,  molasses  and  rum.  Philip 
English,  William  Pickering  and  George  Curwen,  heavily  in- 

si  New  England  rum  was  worth  approximately  2s.  per  gallon. 

82  For  interesting  material  in  regard  to  the  rum  trade,  see  Commerce 
of  Rhode  Island,  M.  H.  S.  Collections,  Seventh  series,  IX,  46-47, 
59-60,  64,  96,  339,  517,  X,  14;  Kimball,  op.  cit.,  pp.  247-248. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


50 

terested  in  the  trade  to  Virginia  and  the  Carolinas,  were 
amassing  considerable  fortunes  in  the  early  years  of  the 
century.83  Thomas  Amory  in  Boston  was  testing  with 
favourable  results  the  possibilities  of  commercial  intercourse 
between  Massachusetts,  the  West  Indies  and  Carolina.  His 
ships  carried  fish,  lumber  and  foodstuffs  to  the  sugar  planters 
of  Jamaica  and  Barbados,  whence  sugar  and  spirits  were 
taken  to  satisfy  the  increasing  demand  of  the  continental 
colonies.  It  was  the  day  when  Peter  Faneuil,  James  Brown, 
and  the  Derbys,  of  Salem,  were  building  solid  fortunes  from 
the  trade  with  the  West  Indies.84  A  little  later  Stephen 
Hopkins  of  Providence,  disgruntled  with  the  scant  profit  in 
the  slave-trade,  turned  his  attention  more  particularly  to 
the  English  and  French  islands.85  Boston  merchants, 
though  Birket  thought  their  trade  was  declining  in  1750, 
were  still  supplying  their  customers  with  fish  and  rum, 
receiving  in  return  drygoods  from  England,  flour  and  pro¬ 
visions  from  the  middle  colonies,  pitch  and  turpentine  from 
North  Carolina  and  tobacco  from  Virginia.86 

On  the  eve  of  the  Revolution,  then,  spirituous  liquor  was 
one  of  the  greatest  factors  in  moving  colonial  commerce. 
In  whatever  branch  of  trade  the  merchant  invested  his  capi¬ 
tal  he  relied  upon  rum  or  some  other  form  of  ardent  spirits  to 
earn  profits  for  him.  Since  the  traffic  in  intoxicants  was 
consistently  profitable  for  all  wbo  engaged  in  it,  the  public 
accorded  it  that  approbation  which  attaches  to  most  things 
indispensable  to  the  world  of  business.  Nothing  short  of 
a  revolution  in  public  opinion  could  remove  it  from  its 
important  place  in  American  life. 

83  G.  F.  Cheever,  “Some  Remarks  on  the  Commerce  of  Salem,”  Essex 
Institute  Collections,  I,  85,  172. 

s*  R.  E.  Peabody,  “The  Derbys  of  Salem,”  Essex  Institute  Collections, 
XLIV,  207. 

ss  Kimball,  op.  cit.,  257-258,  275-277. 

88  Birket,  op.  cit.,  p.  23. 


CHAPTER  III 


VOICES  IN  THE  WILDERNESS 

The  half-century  following  the  achievement  of  American 
independence  was  marked  by  a  gradual  change  in  the  popular 
attitude  toward  the  use,  manufacture  and  sale  of  intoxicants. 
There  is  a  temptation  to  find  the  genesis  of  this  movement 
for  social  reform  in  the  isolated  protests  of  the  seventeenth 
century,  but  no  continuing  element  seems  to  run  through 
the  early  denunciation  of  intemperance.  Condemnation  of 
excessive  drinking  came  from  various  sources,  and  the  under¬ 
lying  motives  were  as  different  as  the  individuals  and  groups 
who  voiced  the  warning.  An  exception  might  well  be  made, 
however,  in  the  case  of  the  Puritan  clergy,  for  the  sombre 
background  of  Calvinism  gave  unity  and  continuity  to 
numerous  attempts  to  restrain  individual  excesses.  Puri¬ 
tanism  had  not  been  established  fifty  years  upon  American 
soil,  when  its  high  priests  took  alarm  at  the  serious  inroads 
made  by  the  prevalence  of  intemperance.  A  gradual  lowering 
of  religious  and  moral  standards  among  the  people  caused 
John  Higginson  to  take  action  against  an  evil,  which  John 
Winthrop  had  noticed  a  generation  earlier.  In  1670,  while 
pastor  of  the  church  at  Salem,  Higginson  addressed  a  note 
of  admonition  to  the  magistrates,  advising  them  to  exercise 
greater  care  in  their  regulation  of  the  sale  of  liquor.1 
Several  years  later  he  followed  up  this  warning  with  a 
statement  of  his  reasons  for  cautioning  the  authorities. 
Inasmuch  as  he  had  been  set  in  his  place  by  God  and  men  to 
guard  his  people  from  sin,  he  had  been  vigilant  in  searching 
out  the  influences  which  combat  religious  and  moral  princi- 

1  Essex  County  Court  Files,  Essex  Institute  Collections,  XLIV,  192, 

51 


52  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

pies.  His  observations  had  convinced  him  that  drunkenness 
was  such  an  influence,  that  it  was  constantly  increasing  in 
Massachusetts  and  that  the  magistrates  were  responsible, 
since  they  had  licensed  too  many  ordinaries  and  public 
drinking-houses.2 

Higginson  belonged  to  a  group  of  conservative  clergy,  who 
were  defending  the  bulwarks  of  orthodox  Puritanism  against 
the  increasing  attacks  of  anti-Calvinistic  liberalism.  In 
this  defence  none  were  more  conspicious  than  the  Mathers, 
father  and  son.  Increase  Mather,  sensing  that  the  manners 
of  the  younger  generation  might  be  partially  responsible  for 
its  unwillingness  to  recognize  authority  in  high  places,  pub¬ 
lished  a  pamphlet  in  1673,  calling  upon  the  colony  to  dis¬ 
courage  tippling  and  to  banish  the  habitual  drunkard.  In 
realistic  terms  he  delineated  the  evils  which  befall  a  society, 
tolerant  of  intemperance  in  its  midst.3  So  earnest  was  he  in 
the  matter,  that  he  sawT  a  causal  relation  between  the  first 
case  of  smallpox  in  Boston  in  1675  and  the  fact  that  the 
victim  was  the  daughter  of  an  ordinary-keeper.  It  was  a 
testimonial  of  God’s  displeasure  against  the  sin  of  drunken¬ 
ness.4  Although  Mather’s  sermons  were  sufficiently  personal 
to  earn  him  a  mild  rebuke  from  Governor  Bradstreet,  he 
continued  to  preach  against  the  increase  of  ordinaries, 
confiding  to  his  diary  that  the  Governor  himself  was  re¬ 
sponsible.5  In  1686  he  had  the  opportunity  in  a  dramatic 
setting  to  state  his  cause  before  a  great  multitude.  With  his 
colleague,  John  Moody,  he  was  invited  to  preach  a  public 
sermon  to  James  Morgan,  a  prisoner  condemned  to  death 
for  a  murder  committed  while  under  the  influence  of  liquor. 
Both  clergymen  denounced  the  ravages  made  upon  the  youth 
of  the  colony  by  a  new  drink  recently  come  into  the  country. 

2  Essex  Institute  Collections,  XLIII,  180. 

3  Increase  Mather,  Woe  to  Drunkards  (1673). 

♦  Elizabeth  D.  Hanscom,  The  Heart  of  the  Puritan,  p.  177. 

s  Diary  by  Increase  Mather,  S.  A.  Green,  editor,  pp.  23,  24. 


VOICES  IN  THE  WILDERNESS  53 

They  attributed  to  this  rum  or  “killdevil”  the  increase  in 
drunkenness,  which  was  weakening  the  moral  fibre  of  the 
younger  generation.  Dunton  recorded  the  solemnity  of  the 
discourses  and  the  profound  impression  made  on  the  curious 
crowd  assembled  to  witness  the  execution.6 

The  mantle  of  Increase  Mather  fell  upon  the  shoulders  of 
his  son,  Cotton.  Both  in  the  defence  of  true  religion  and  in 
the  attack  upon  intemperance  the  son  was  more  active  than 
the  father.  Ever  alert  to  detect  heresy,  he  thought  that  he 
observed  a  close  connection  between  loose-living  and  free- 
thinking.  How  could  one  explain  the  reckless  running  after 
false  gods  of  a  perverse  generation  except  as  a  result  of 
profligate  and  degenerate  manners?  In  his  own  mind  the 
solution  was  clearly  outlined.  The  commanding  voice  of 
the  clergy  must  be  raised  to  enforce  the  sober  conduct  and 
conversation,  which  had  distinguished  the  colony  in  its  early 
days.  Accordingly,  Mather  joined  with  the  other  ministers 
of  Boston  in  1694  to  petition  the  General  Court  for  effec¬ 
tive  regulation  of  ordinaries.  The  deplorable  state  of  re¬ 
ligion  in  the  colony,  reasoned  the  petitioners,  was  due  to 
excessive  tippling,  and  the  civil  authorities  were  obligated  to 
assist  their  ecclesiastical  brethren  in  suppressing  the  evil.7 
Independent  of  any  action  by  the  law-makers,  Mather  began 
his  campaign  against  the  enemy.  In  his  diary  he  recorded 
the  opinion  that  “the  flood  of  excessive  drinking”  had  begun 
to  “drown  Christianity.”  8  With  this  in  mind  he  devoted  his 
Fast  Day  discourse  in  1698  to  a  consideration  of  the  forces 
of  good  and  evil  in  Boston.  Although  he  lamented  the 
enormous  number  of  drinking  houses  and  feared  their  in¬ 
fluence,  he  admitted  that  the  keepers  of  the  houses  were  en¬ 
gaged  in  an  honest  and  legal  employment.  He  challenged 
the  proprietors,  however,  to  suppress  drunkenness,  revelling 

«  Dunton,  op.  cit.,  pp.  125-132. 

7  Waters,  Ipswich  in  the  Massachusetts  Bay  Colony,  II,  75-76. 

s  Diary  of  Cotton  Mather,  II,  215. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


54 

and  wasting  of  time  in  their  establishments  that  they  might 
fulfil  their  proper  mission  in  the  community.9  In  order  to 
reach  a  wider  audience  he  published  a  pamphlet  entitled 
Sober  Considerations  on  a  Growing  Flood  of  Iniquity,  which 
supplemented  an  earlier  tract  denouncing  the  sale  of  rum 
to  Indians.10  For  his  own  congregation  at  Second  Church 
he  had  frequent  examples  of  the  ruinous  effects  of  intem¬ 
perance  upon  the  colony.11  Nor  did  he  confine  his  attention 
to  Massachusetts.  Reports  from  Connecticut  in  1711  so 
moved  him  that  he  considered  writing  a  strong  letter  of 
protest  to  the  principal  ministers  in  that  section,  calling 
their  attention  to  the  “fearful  circumstances  into  which  love 
of  rum  had  brought  some  of  their  number.”  12  This  concern 
for  the  moral  welfare  of  the  community,  Mather  never 
considered  less  worthy  of  his  time  and  attention  than  his 
religious  and  scholarly  activities.  As  late  as  1726,  only 
two  years  before  his  earthly  labours  were  over,  he  published 
in  collaboration  with  others  Seasonable  Advice  Concerning 
the  Tavern,  which  proved  that  he  appreciated  the  true  role 
of  the  public-house,  but  hated  the  excessive  use  of  ardent 
spirits. 

The  Mathers  were  not  the  only  protestants  against  in¬ 
temperance.  Judge  Samuel  Sewall  heard  Benjamin  Wads¬ 
worth  preach  earnestly  against  the  foolish  custom  of  health 
drinking  and  the  wickedness  it  encouraged.13  No  doubt  he 
also  read  Wadsworth’s  pamphlet  on  the  same  subject,  or  that 
of  Samuel  Danforth,  pastor  at  Bristol,  on  the  Woful  Effects 
of  Drunkenness.  The  New  England  Courant  printed  and 
profitably  sold  in  1724  an  interesting  satire  known  as  The 
Tryal  of  Sir  Richard  Rum.  At  a  court  held  at  Punch  Hall 

9  Cotton  Mather,  The  Bostonian  Ebenezer,  Old  South  Leaflets,  67, 
p.  14. 

10  Charles  Evans,  American  Bibliography,  I,  142,  196. 

11  Diary,  I,  21. 

12  Ibid.,  I,  61. 

is  Diary  of  Samuel  Sewall,  III,  68. 


VOICES  IN  THE  WILDERNESS  55 

in  the  colony  of  Bacchus.  The  Indictment  and  Tryal  of 
Sir  Richard  Rum,  a  person  of  noble  birth  and  extraction, 
well  known  to  both  rich  and  poor  throughout  all  America .14 
Of  the  popularity  of  the  defendant  there  could  be  no  doubt, 
but  more  serious  indictments  than  the  one  returned  at  Punch 
Hall  were  being  presented  for  popular  judgment.  To  the 
Society  of  Friends  must  be  attributed  the  most  effective 
and  consistent  opposition  to  the  increasing  use  of  intoxi¬ 
cants.  Although  the  Quaker  ideal  everywhere  was  modera¬ 
tion,  the  attitude  of  the  various  communities  was  not 
uniform.  The  Welsh  societies  in  Pennsylvania  disciplined 
members  for  excessive  drinking,  but  placed  no  ban  upon 
members  engaging  in  the  liquor  traffic  until  the  closing  years 
of  the  eighteenth  century.15  The  Philadelphia  Friends  in 
1721  supported  a  movement  to  prevent  the  sale  of  ardent 
spirits  in  the  province  and  to  encourage  the  brewing  of 
beer  as  a  substitute.16  The  custom  of  serving  liquor  at 
public  vendues  was  denounced  at  a  meeting  of  the  Bucks 
County  societies  in  1724,  and  two  years  later  the  Yearly 
Meeting  took  similar  action.17  After  1736  the  Yearly 
Meeting  issued  periodic  warnings  to  all  Quakers  against  the 
too  frequent  use  of  spirits,  but  the  sect  was  not  committed 
to  any  hard  and  fast  rules  of  abstinence. 

Thomas  Chalkley  was  typical  of  the  most  earnest  temper¬ 
ance  workers  among  the  Friends  during  the  eighteenth 
century.  Zealously  striving  to  improve  moral  conditions  in 
Pennsylvania  and  the  neighbouring  provinces,  he  was  often 
moved  by  the  Spirit  to  extol  the  virtues  of  moderation. 
According  to  his  inward  light,  he  wTas  certain  that  no  drunk¬ 
ard  could  hope  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  By  sermons 

Felt,  Annals  of  Salem,  II,  453.  This  pamphlet  was  republished  in 
Boston  in  1750.  Evans,  Bibliography,  II,  414. 
is  Jenkins,  op.  cit.,  pp.  388-389. 

10 History  of  Bucks  County,  Pa.,  W.  H.  Davis,  editor,  p.  385; 
Watson,  Annals  of  Philadelphia,  III,  344. 
it  Watson,  Annals  of  Philadelphia,  I,  97. 


56  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

filled  with  sorrowful  instances  of  the  terrible  effect  of  in¬ 
temperance,  he  sought  to  frighten  the  young  from  tempta¬ 
tion  and  bring  the  old  to  repentance.  In  1727  he  devoted 
his  time  particularly  to  Philadelphia,  where  the  great  sins 
committed  by  the  inhabitants  in  the  public-houses  had 
aroused  the  “anger  of  the  Lord.”  18  As  his  ministry  grew 
in  years,  he  became  more  pessimistic  about  the  manners  and 
morals  of  his  generation,  crying  out  in  despair  against  flip¬ 
pant,  gambling,  tippling  youngsters,  wTho  spent  their  time 
in  frivolous  pursuits,  which  they  learned  while  idling  around 
the  taverns.19  That  Chalkley  was  not  alone  in  his  concern 
for  his  generation  is  evident  from  a  report  submitted  in 
1744  by  a  Philadelphia  grand  jury  of  which  Benjamin 
Franklin  was  foreman.  Never  an  intemperate  drinker, 
Franklin  could  well  voice  the  consternation  with  which  he 
and  his  associates  viewed  the  rapid  increase  in  public-houses 
selling  ardent  spirits.  The  report  to  the  justices  recom¬ 
mended  that  the  number  of  licences  be  restricted,  since  it 
appeared  that  the  tippling-houses  were  responsible  for  the 
increased  number  of  poor,  the  common  use  of  profane  lan¬ 
guage  in  the  streets,  and  the  growing  indifference  to  God 
and  religion.20 

Puritan  priest  and  Quaker  missionary  were  joined  in  their 
temperance  efforts  by  English  philanthropists,  for  the 
founders  of  Georgia  sought  to  insure  sobriety  by  sumptuary 
legislation.  No  sooner  had  the  first  settlement  been  made 
than  the  trustees  began  their  propaganda  against  ardent 
spirits.  In  1734  they  sent  to  the  colony  100  copies  of  Dr. 
Hale’s  Friendly  Admonition  to  the  Drinkers  of  Brandy,  an 
English  pamphlet  advocating  the  use  of  malt  liquors.  To 
each  settler  the  trustees  granted  44  gallons  of  strong  beer 
and  64  gallons  of  molasses  for  brewing,  with  the  hope  that 

is  Journal  of  Thomas  Chalkley,  pp.  254,  258,  291. 

19  Ibid.,  pp.  288-289. 

20  Pa.  Hist.  Soc.,  Collections,  I,  267-268. 


VOICES  IN  THE  WILDERNESS  57 

beer  would  become  the  popular  beverage.21  In  1735  they 
enforced  an  act,  approved  by  the  King  in  Council  the  pre¬ 
vious  year,  prohibiting  the  importation  or  sale  of  ardent 
spirits  within  the  confines  of  the  province.22  From  the 
records  of  the  futile  attempts  to  make  this  prohibition 
effective  one  could  write  tales  of  adventure  and  romance, 
comparable  to  the  modern  short  stories  which  have  cast  a 
glamour  over  violations  of  the  Volstead  Act.  Eighteenth 
century  rum-runners,  with  greater  ease  and  less  fear  of 
detection  than  is  experienced  by  twentieth  century  boot¬ 
leggers,  landed  their  valuable  cargoes  in  secluded  Georgia 
coves,  or  packed  their  heavy  loads  along  the  wilderness 
trails  from  a  neighbouring  province.  When  General  Ogle¬ 
thorpe  visited  his  colony  in  1736,  he  found  the  northern 
section  supplied  with  rum  which  came  in  by  way  of  South 
Carolina.23 

At  Savannah  the  rum-runners  demanded  and  received  jury 
trial,  with  the  result  that  the  decision  of  their  peers  was 
usually  acquittal,  no  matter  how  incriminating  the  evi¬ 
dence.24  William  Stephens,  secretary  to  the  trustees,  re¬ 
ported  that  at  the  trial  of  one  dealer  the  presiding  justice 
instructed  the  jury  to  bring  in  a  verdict  of  guilty,  but  the 
jury  refused  to  follow  instructions.25  Oglethorpe,  although 
a  strong  supporter  of  the  law,  was  convinced  that  no  twelve 
men  in  the  colony  could  be  trusted  to  punish  a  person  who 
sold  ardent  spirits.  The  majority  of  people  in  Georgia 
simply  refused  to  regard  the  sale  and  use  of  rum  as  a 
criminal  offence.  Obedience  to  the  law  seems  to  have  been 
limited  to  the  German  Salzburgers,  who  were  satisfied  with 

21  Ga.  Col.  Rec.,  I,  121;  Scomp,  op.  cit.,  p.  63;  An  Account  Showing 
the  Progress  of  the  Colony  of  Georgia  in  America,  p.  39. 

22  Ga.  Col.  Rec.,  I,  44-48. 

22  Ga.  Hist.  Soc.,  Collections,  III,  45. 

'-*Ibid.,  Ill,  73. 

25  Ga.  Col.  Rec.,  IV,  78,  90. 


58  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

the  malt  beverages  permitted  under  the  regulations.28 
Stephens  wrote  to  his  employers  vivid  accounts  of  the 
scandalous  practice  of  selling  rum  in  private  houses,  which 
soon  became  “nurseries  of  all  villainy,”  where  servants  were 
debauched,  and  idleness  and  profaneness  encouraged.  He 
suspected  that  some  of  the  officials  were  making  a  profit  out 
of  the  business,  since  tippling-houses  were  becoming  as 
numerous  as  gin-houses  in  London.27  In  1739  a  riot,  in¬ 
spired  by  hoodlums  under  the  influence  of  liquor,  frightened 
the  Savannah  magistrates  into  a  decision  to  enforce  the  law, 
but  the  situation  had  gotten  beyond  control.  Suppression 
of  illegal  sales  was  too  large  a  task  for  the  officials.28  Con¬ 
vinced  that  the  liquor  law  could  not  be  enforced,  and  per¬ 
suaded  by  British  merchants  that  the  rum  trade  was  highly 
profitable,  the  trustees  abandoned  their  experiment  in  pro¬ 
hibitory  legislation.  After  1742  no  attempt  was  made  to 
restrict  the  sale  of  spirits,  except  by  the  regulatory  pro¬ 
visions  of  a  licensing  system.29  Several  years  later  Stephens 
testified  that  the  change  had  been  a  wise  one,  for  trade  was 
prospering  under  the  impulse  of  rum,  and  there  was  less 
drunkenness  in  the  colony  than  before  the  law’s  repeal.30  So 
Oglethorpe  and  his  friends,  sincere  though  they  were,  had 
failed  to  foster  temperance  by  legislative  enactment  in  the 
face  of  a  hostile  public  opinion. 

The  popularity  of  distilled  spirits  with  all  classes  increased 
constantly  during  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century. 
Students  of  the  period  have  attributed  the  apparent  lowering 
of  moral  standards  to  the  demoralizing  influence  of  the 
colonial  wars,  which  wrought  havoc  with  the  simple  life  of  the 

26  p.  A.  Strobel,  The  Salzburgers  and  Their  Descendants,  p.  102. 

2 7Qa.  Col.  Bee.,  XXII,  pt.  i,  164,  195;  IV,  62,  121-122;  XXII,  pt.  ii, 
84. 

28  Ibid.,  IV,  388-389;  V,  330,  342,  500. 

29  Oa.  Col.  Bee.,  I,  398,  403,  407. 

so  Ibid.,  XXV,  137-138. 


VOICES  IN  THE  WILDERNESS  59 

colonists.31  Though  this  generalization  may  be  a  trifle  too 
sweeping,  it  is  certain  that  the  experiences  of  camp  and  bat¬ 
tlefield  did  not  encourage  temperance  and  sobriety.  Horatio 
Sharpe,  governor  of  Maryland,  wrote  to  Lord  Baltimore 
shortly  before  the  French  and  Indian  War  that  the  consump¬ 
tion  of  rum  had  become  the  disgrace  of  the  colony.  A  few 
years  later  he  condemned  the  morals  of  the  clergy  in  no 
uncertain  terms,  naming  several  whom  he  knew  to  be  ha¬ 
bitual  drunkards  and  expressing  contempt  for  a  community 
which  tolerated  such  leadership.32  Dr.  Archibald  Alexan¬ 
der,  practising  physician  in  the  western  part  of  Virginia, 
observed  a  great  increase  in  drunkenness  as  an  accompani¬ 
ment  of  the  French  and  Indian  War.33  During  the  war 
Pennsylvania  was  forced  to  place  unusual  restrictions  upon 
the  liquor  traffic  in  order  to  prevent  disorderly  conduct 
among  the  colonial  troops.  Rhode  Island  blamed  the  ven¬ 
dors  of  strong  drink  for  the  numerous  desertions  from  His 
Majesty’s  service.34  John  Adams  was  so  disturbed  by  the 
situation  in  Massachusetts  that  he  presented  a  resolution 
to  the  selectmen  of  Braintree,  providing  for  the  limitation 
of  licensed  dealers  in  the  town.  His  action  was  prompted 
by  “the  present  prevailing  depravity  of  manners  through 
the  land  in  general  and  this  town  in  particular  and  the 
shameful  neglect  of  religious  and  civil  duties,  so  highly 
offensive  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  injurious  to  the  peace  and 
welfare  of  society.”  35 

The  fears,  which  Adams  expressed  in  1761,  though  over¬ 
shadowed  by  the  eventful  decade  preceding  the  Revolution, 
were  not  proved  groundless  by  subsequent  developments. 

81  C.  F.  Adams,  op.  cit.,  p.  786;  S.  G.  Fisher,  op.  cit.,  I,  287;  A.  D. 
Melliek,  Story  of  an  Old  Farm,  pp.  614 — 615 ;  H.  Hollister,  History  of 
the  Lackawanna  Valley,  pp.  141-142;  George  Duffield,  Samson  Shorn, 
p.  14;  American  Quarterly  Temperance  Magazine,  February,  1833. 

*2Md.  Arch.,  VI,  164;  XIV,  507. 

38  O.  F.  Morton,  History  of  Rockbridge  County,  Virginia,  pp.  181-182. 

34  Pa.  Arch.,  First  series,  III,  132;  R.  I.  Col.  Rec.,  VI,  186-187. 

85  S.  A.  Bates,  Records  of  the  Town  of  Braintree,  pp.  378-379. 


60  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

The  popularity  of  New  England  rum  and  Jamaica  spirits  was 
challenged  during  this  period  by  a  product  of  the  west — 
whisky.  Originally  distilled  from  grain  by  the  western 
farmer  for  home  consumption,  it  soon  became  a  favourite 
beverage  with  a  high  commercial  value.  Bulky  grain  was 
marketed  with  difficulty  over  roads  little  better  than  Indian 
trails  or  hunters’  traces,  but  wbisky,  representing  concen¬ 
trated  value,  was  readily  salable.  It  even  passed  in  some 
districts  as  an  acceptable  substitute  for  currency.  Its 
popularity  was  enhanced  during  the  Revolutionary  War  be¬ 
cause  of  the  difficulty  experienced  in  securing  good  rum. 
The  military  records  are  eloquent  testimonials  of  the  im¬ 
portant  role  it  played  in  the  economy  of  those  who  fought 
and  those  who  sold  supplies.  Each  colony  sought  to  pro¬ 
vide  its  militia  Avith  the  best  liquor  obtainable,  but  com¬ 
plaints  were  numerous  that  poor  whisky  was  the  chief  drink 
furnished.36  The  Continental  troops  were  allowed  either  a 
gill  or  a  half-pint  of  whisky  per  day,  according  to  the  state 
of  the  stores.37  Frequently,  however,  even  a  gill  was  not 
forthcoming.  The  Supreme  Executive  Council  of  Pennsyl¬ 
vania,  having  ordered  rum  or  whisky  to  be  distributed  to 
the  militia  daily,  feared  that  difficulty  might  arise  when  the 
troops  joined  the  Continental  forces,  since  General  Wash¬ 
ington  might  see  “inconvenience  in  distributing  strong  liq¬ 
uors,  of  which  the  people  are  fond,  to  one  part  of  his  army 
while  another  is  neglected.”  Accordingly,  the  spirit  ration 
was  commuted  to  a  pay  equivalent.38  So  keen  was  the  de¬ 
sire  of  the  men  for  liquor,  however,  that  the  Quartermaster- 
General  was  authorized  to  allow  one  sutler  to  each  brigade  of 
the  Continental  line,  who  might  sell  whisky,  rum,  gin,  brandy 
and  cordials.39  A  visitor  to  the  army  during  the  terrible 

36  Md.  Arch.,  XII,  139;  Pa.  Arch.,  First  series,  VIII,  640-641. 

37  “Bicker’s  Orderly  Book  of  the  Second  Pennsylvania  Continental 
Line,”  Pa.  Mag.,  XXXVI,  30-31;  N.  C.  State  Records,  XIV,  133. 

38  Pa.  Arch.,  First  series,  V,  661-562. 

39  pa.  Mag.,  XXXVI,  31. 


VOICES  IN  THE  WILDERNESS  61 

winter  at  Valley  Forge  heard  the  complaint  of  the  soldiers 
constantly  voiced  in  the  refrain:  “No  pay,  no  clothes,  no 
provisions,  no  rum.”  40  Between  two  and  three  hundred 
gallons  of  whisky  a  week  were  consumed  by  the  workmen  at 
Trenton,  engaged  in  building  a  fleet  for  Pennsylvania.  Wil¬ 
liam  Crispin,  the  commissary  agent,  wrote  to  the  Council  of 
Safety  that  he  had  seized  several  hogsheads  of  liquor  in  the 
neighbourhood,  but  the  labourers  were  clamouring  for  more, 
and  he  feared  that  his  safety  depended  upon  an  adequate 
supply  of  rum  or  whisky.41  In  1780  Congress  sought  to 
meet  the  general  demand  by  apportioning  the  responsibility 
for  providing  liquor  among  the  various  states.  Connecti¬ 
cut’s  share  was  over  68,000  gallons,  and  the  state  Council  of 
Safety  began  purchasing  molasses  for  distillation  at  Middle- 
town  and  Norwich.42  Massachusetts  circulated  broadsides 
calling  upon  all  patriotic  citizens  to  sell  their  supplies  to  the 
public  authorities.43  General  Gates,  president  of  the  Board 
of  War,  threatened  to  seize  all  stocks  of  ardent  spirits 
which  were  being  held  out  of  the  army  stores  by  specu¬ 
lators.44 

These  strenuous  efforts  to  provide  sufficient  quantities  of 
liquor  are  but  an  indication  of  the  widespread  use  of  the 
product  of  the  still.  That  the  war  served  to  increase  this 
use  is  evident  from  contemporary  records.  Chastellux, 
during  his  extensive  travels  in  America  in  1780  and  1781, 
lamented  the  scarcity  of  good  wines,  but  was  gratified  by  the 
regularity  with  which  he  encountered  the  punch  bowl. 
Whether  he  was  drinking  toasts  at  General  Washington’s 
table,  or  reading  Ossian  with  Jefferson  till  far  into  the  night, 
or  penetrating  the  hills  and  valleys  of  western  Virginia,  he 

James  Thacher,  A  Military  Journal,  p.  154n. 

<iPa.  Arch.,  First  series,  VI,  203. 

*2  State  Records  of  Connecticut,  II,  521;  III,  248,  448. 

Broadsides,  Ballads  ...  in  Massachusetts,  1639-1800,  M.  H.  S ,, 
Collections,  LXXV,  287. 

**  Pa.  Arch.,  First  series,  VI,  205. 


62  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

was  constantly  cheered  by  some  form  of  distilled  spirits.45 
He  considered  the  American  practice  of  drinking  healths  at 
meals  absurd  and  barbarous,  for  each  person  indulged  in  a 
ridiculous  comedy  of  drinking  successively  the  health  of 
every  other  person  present,  till  excessive  politeness  resulted 
in  boisterous  uproar.  Unlike  the  German  toasts,  however, 
the  custom  seldom  caused  any  unseemly  over-indulgence,  in 
spite  of  the  fact  that  it  was  practised  by  the  servant  class  as 
well  as  in  higher  social  circles.46  In  his  visits  to  the  homes 
of  prominent  Americans,  Claude  Blanchard,  commissary  to 
the  French  army  in  America,  discovered  that  the  restrictions 
of  war-time  had  not  deprived  his  hosts  of  cider  and  ardent 
spirits.  In  the  western  sections  he  encountered  little  else 
in  the  way  of  beverages,  but  European  wines  were  not 
uncommon  on  the  tables  of  the  wealthier  class.47  Brissot  de 
Warville,  writing  of  conditions  in  New  England  during 
1788,  expressed  surprise  at  the  abundance  and  variety  of 
the  wines  and  brandies  and  noticed  that  most  people  pre¬ 
ferred  ardent  spirits  to  milder  liquors.48 

Distillations  from  grain  were  becoming  more  popular  in 
all  parts  of  the  country.  Domestic  production  was  aug¬ 
mented  in  1790  by  the  importation  of  3,678,000  gallons  of 
spirits,  and  two  years  later  4,869,000  gallons  were  brought 
into  the  country.49  Soon  afterward  the  Whisky  Rebellion 
against  the  federal  excise  on  spirituous  liquors  dramatically 
revealed  the  importance  of  domestic  distilling  in  the  western 
counties  of  Pennsylvania,  where  almost  every  family  manu¬ 
factured  its  own  supply.  In  rural  communities  throughout 
the  country  little  work  was  done  without  the  stimulus  of  in- 

•45  Chastellux,  op.  cit.,  pp.  23,  67-68,  226,  229. 

48 Ibid.,  pp.  92-93;  Journal  of  Claude  Blanchard,  pp.  65-66,  116-117, 
119. 

Blanchard,  pp.  78-79,  Chastellux,  p.  234. 

48  J.  p.  Brissot  de  Warville,  New  Travels  in  the  United  States  of 
America,  pp.  103-104. 

49  Tench  Coxe,  A  View  of  the  United  States  of  America,  pp.  421, 
492. 


VOICES  IN  THE  WILDERNESS  63 

toxicants,  while  occasions  such  as  haying,  corn-husking, 
barn-raising  and  fence-building  were  times  of  special  indulg¬ 
ence  for  the  entire  neighbourhood.50  Wages  were  quoted  in 
terms  that  included  the  customary  daily  allowance  of  rum, 
and  few  labourers  cared  to  accept  more  money  in  lieu  of  the 
liquor.51  Merchants  carried  larger  stocks  of  “wet  goods” 
than  dry  goods,  selling  in  large  or  small  quantities  without 
regard  to  the  terms  of  their  licences.  No  grocer  seemed  to 
prosper  unless  he  kept  a  barrel  on  tap  and  treated  his  cus¬ 
tomers  whenever  they  settled  their  accounts.  For  trainings, 
musters  and  other  public  ceremonies  the  town  was  supposed 
to  furnish  the  refreshments,  while  at  ordinations,  installa¬ 
tions  and  district  councils  the  church  supplied  the  inevitable 
wines  and  spirits.52 

Meanwhile,  the  abundance  and  cheapness  of  intoxicants, 
permitting  their  constant  use  by  all  classes,  caused  intemper¬ 
ance  to  grow  apace,  with  the  result  that  efforts  to  suppress 
the  vice  increased.53  Once  again  the  warning  was  sounded 
by  the  Puritan  and  the  Quaker.  Jonathan  Edwards  made 
his  conduct  more  than  his  speech  a  plea  for  the  “strictest 
temperance  in  drinking.”  Before  he  reached  the  age  of 
twenty  he  solemnly  decided  that  he  would  follow  a  rule  of  ab¬ 
stinence  except  in  cases  of  necessity.  Although  his  resolu¬ 
tion  was  not  often  paraded  in  his  sermons  and  writings,  he 
frequently  recorded  in  his  journal  the  benefits  of  the  course 

60  J.  E.  Pilcher,  Life  and  Labors  of  E.  H.  Pilcher,  pp.  16-17. 

si  Letter  of  Jeremiah  Libbey  to  Jeremy  Belknap,  December  17,  1789. 
Belknap  Papers,  [Jf.  H.  S.,  Collections,  Fifth  Series,  ii-iii,  Sixth 
Series,  iv]  III,  456. 

52  Ida  G.  Adams,  “The  Passing  of  Intemperance  in  a  Country  Town,” 
Granite  Monthly,  XXXII,  300;  A.  S.  Hudson,  History  of  Sudbury, 
Mass.,  p.  606;  J.  W.  Headland,  History  of  Loudoun  County,  Va., 
p.  118;  F.  P.  Wells,  History  of  Newbury,  Vt.,  pp.  255-256;  Louise  W. 
Murray,  Old  Tioga  Point  and  Early  Athens,  Pa.,  pp.  52—54;  A.  D. 
Mellick,  op.  cit.,  617-619. 

53  At  the  close  of  the  18th  century  whisky  generally  retailed  for  40 
or  50  cents  a  gallon. 


64  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

he  was  pursuing.  Experiences  of  the  passing  years  con¬ 
firmed  his  opinion  that  temperance  kept  a  man  “sprightly 
and  healthy  in  mind  and  body.”  54  Edwards’  mild  testimony 
against  spirituous  liquors  was  not  unlike  the  attack  of  that 
lovable  preacher  of  the  gospel  of  humility,  John  Woolman. 
Almost  apologetically  Woolman  advised  the  Friends  to  whom 
he  ministered  to  consider  carefully  the  consequences  of  in¬ 
temperate  drinking.  He  understood  full  well  that  those  who 
toiled  long  hours  in  the  heat  of  summer  found  a  welcome 
stimulant  in  strong  drink,  but  in  this  very  practice,  he  be¬ 
lieved,  lurked  the  danger.  With  that  direct  simplicity  so 
characteristic  of  all  his  writings  he  recorded  in  1769  his 
reasons  for  preaching  temperance. 

I  have  found  [he  wrote]  that  too  much  Labour  in  the  summer 
heats  the  Blood,  that  taking  Strong  Drink  to  support  the  Body 
under  such  Labour,  increaseth  that  Heat,  and  though  a  Person 
may  be  so  far  temperate  as  not  to  manifest  the  least  Disorder, 
yet  the  Mind,  in  such  a  circumstance,  doth  not  retain  that  calm¬ 
ness  and  serenity  which  we  should  endeavor  to  live  in.  Thus 
toiling  in  the  Heat,  and  drinking  Strong  Liquor,  makes  men 
more  resolute  and  less  considerate,  and  tends  very  much  to  dis¬ 
qualify  them  from  successfully  following  Him  who  is  meek  and 
low  of  Heart.55 

More  vigorous  in  his  protests,  and  hence  more  representa¬ 
tive  of  the  determined  reformers,  was  Anthony  Benezet.  A 
Quaker  of  Huguenot  descent,  he  had  settled  in  Philadelphia 
in  1731  after  his  family  had  felt  the  heavy  hand  of  persecu¬ 
tion  in  France.  Having  dedicated  his  life  to  ceaseless  war 
against  “whatever  has  a  tendency  to  abridge  the  comforts, 
increase  the  sorrows,  or  endanger  the  safety  of  men,”  Bene- 

54  Memoirs  of  the  Rev.  Jonathan  Edwards  by  Samuel  Hopkins, 
John  Hawksley,  ed.,  pp.  12,  20,  31. 

65  The  Journal  and  Essays  of  John  Woolman,  Amelia  M.  Gummere, 
ed.,  pp.  183-184,  281,  293,  388-389. 


VOICES  IN  THE  WILDERNESS  65 

zet  soon  became  a  force  in  the  life  of  his  adopted  city. 
After  teaching  for  thirteen  years  in  the  William  Penn  school 
he  established  a  school  for  girls,  based  upon  his  own  educa¬ 
tional  theories,  where  an  attempt  was  made  to  devise  a 
curriculum  which  would  meet  the  needs  of  each  pupil.  Ever 
a  pioneer  in  educational  matters,  he  conducted  an  evening 
school  for  free  Negroes  and  from  his  contacts  with  the  schol¬ 
ars  was  persuaded  that  the  cause  of  the  black  race  required 
his  full  time  and  attention.  Through  correspondence  with 
Patrick  Henry  and  Henry  Laurens,  he  endeavoured  to  in¬ 
terest  leaders  of  thought  in  the  southern  colonies  in  a  plan 
for  gradual  emancipation.  Along  with  his  labours  to  im¬ 
prove  the  condition  of  the  Negro,  he  manifested  a  benevolent 
interest  in  the  welfare  of  the  American  Indian,  which  brought 
him  for  the  first  time  into  close  contact  with  the  problem  of 
intemperance  in  an  aggravated  form.56  Discerning  the  en¬ 
snaring  influence  which  intoxicants  exercised  over  the  red 
man,  Benezet  began  to  study  seriously  their  effect  upon  the 
people  amongst  whom  he  lived.  As  a  result  of  his  observa¬ 
tions  he  published  in  1774  his  first  attack  against  the  habit¬ 
ual  use  of  ardent  spirits.57  It  was  a  small  pamphlet  set¬ 
ting  forth  an  analogy  between  the  ravages  of  strong  drink 
and  the  havoc  wrought  by  a  prolonged  war.  The  poverty, 
disease  and  death,  following  in  the  wake  of  intemperance,  con¬ 
vinced  Benezet  that  liquor  was  as  grim  a  reaper  as  war  it¬ 
self.  To  his  own  satisfaction  he  proved  that  a  community 
could  better  afford  to  endure  the  inevitable  horrors  of  armed 
conflict  than  the  desolation  secretly  effected  by  the  product 
of  the  still.  Four  years  later  he  circulated  at  his  own  ex¬ 
pense  an  analysis  of  the  opinions  of  distinguished  physicians 
in  regard  to  the  effect  of  intoxicants  upon  the  human  body.58 
His  edition  of  the  Pennsylvania  Spelling  Book  in  1779  con- 

5«  Roberts  Vaux,  Memoir  of  the  Life  of  Anthony  Benezet. 

57  The  Mighty  Destroyer  Displayed  (1774). 

58  Rema/rks  on  the  Nature  and  Bad  Effects  of  Spirituous  Liquors 
(1778). 


66  the  origins  of  prohibition 

tained  a  list  of  one  hundred  questions,  comprising  a  temper¬ 
ance  catechism  for  the  instruction  of  the  young.  Questions 
and  answers  sought  to  impress  the  lesson  that  ardent  spirits 
were  harmful  as  a  beverage  and  that  popular  approval  of 
their  use  was  based  on  a  false  conception  of  their  true 
relation  to  the  health  of  the  drinker.69  More  significant 
than  Benezet’s  publications,  however,  was  his  activity  in 
bringing  the  Society  of  Friends  to  the  point  of  defining  its 
position  in  regard  to  the  use,  manufacture  and  sale  of 
intoxicants.  Although  no  action  was  taken  during  his  life¬ 
time,  his  work  bore  fruit  three  years  after  his  death,  when 
the  Yearly  Meeting  of  1787  adopted  a  resolution  recom¬ 
mending  to  the  membership  that  all  refrain  from  dealing  in 
spirituous  liquors.60 

Meanwhile,  another  religious  sect  was  using  its  influence 
in  the  interests  of  temperance.  The  American  Methodist 
societies  were  governed  by  the  same  discipline  as  those  in 
England,  and  the  general  rules  formulated  by  the  Wesleys 
were  theoretically  in  force.  According  to  the  original  rule 
of  1753,  all  Methodists  in  good  standing  were  subject  to 
disciplinary  measures  for  “drunkenness,  buying  or  selling 
spirituous  liquors,  or  using  them,  unless  in  cases  of  extreme 
necessity.”  61  Actually  this  regulation  received  scant  atten¬ 
tion  from  the  followers  of  John  Wesley  in  America,  but  in 
1780  the  General  Conference  of  preachers  placed  itself  on 
record.  Two  questions  were  propounded  and  answered  in 
the  affirmative:  “Shall  we  disapprove  of  the  practice  of 
distilling  grain  into  liquor?  Shall  we  disown  our  friends 
who  will  not  renounce  the  practice?”  Three  years  later  a 
similar  conference  decided  to  admonish  the  membership  to 
abandon  the  manufacture,  sale  and  use  of  spirituous  liquors, 

08  The  Pennsylvania  Spelling  Book  (A.  Benezet,  compiler). 

eo  Letter  of  Benjamin  Rush  to  Jeremy  Belknap,  Belknap  Papers, 
III,  419-420. 

Henry  Wheeler,  Methodism  and  the  Temperance  Reformation,  pp. 
45-46. 


VOICES  IN  THE  WILDERNESS  67 

but  the  admonition  did  not  purge  the  Methodist  societies  of 
all  who  refused  to  give  up  the  trade  in  intoxicants.  When 
Thomas  Coke  visited  the  United  States  in  1784,  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  investing  Francis  Asbury  with  the  episcopal  dignity, 
he  found  great  need  in  the  newly  organized  church  for  his 
exhortations  against  intemperance.®2  Bishop  Asbury,  like¬ 
wise,  had  occasion  to  enforce  the  lessons  of  temperance,  as  he 
carried  a  sense  of  unity  to  the  widely  scattered  societies  of 
the  South  and  West.  Everywhere  he  voiced  in  plain  speech 
his  condemnation  of  communities  which  allowed  intemperance 
to  hinder  the  work  of  the  Christian  church.®3  New  England 
clergymen  were  paying  their  compliments  to  “Demon  Rum” 
with  increasing  frequency,  basing  their  protests  on  considera¬ 
tions  of  public  welfare.  A  sermon  preached  at  Templeton, 
Massachusetts,  in  1776  by  Rev.  Ebenezer  Sparhawk  was 
typical  of  the  pulpit  pronouncements  of  the  period.  The 
minister  realized  that  his  congregation  might  be  surprised 
at  his  choice  of  a  subject,  but  he  justified  himself  by  quoting 
from  the  Scriptures  to  prove  that  intemperate  drinking  was 
a  sin  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  His  denunciation  was  directed 
chiefly  against  the  waste  of  money  involved,  the  misuse  of 
valuable  time,  and  the  ruinous  effect  upon  the  health  of  a 
community.  In  an  unscientific,  but  none  the  less  vivid 
fashion,  he  outlined  the  influence  of  spirituous  liquor  on  the 
body.  It  “puts  the  blood  and  juices  into  a  most  terrible 
ferment,  and  disturbs  the  whole  animal  economy.  It  vitiates 
the  humor,  relaxes  the  solids,  spoils  the  constitution,  fills 
the  body  with  diseases,  brings  on  meager  looks,  a  ghastly 
countenance,  and  very  bad  tremblings :  yea,  when  the  abuse 

62  Minutes  of  the  Methodist  Conference  Annually  Held  in  America, 
I,  26,  41;  Extracts  from  the  Journals  of  the  late  Reverend  Thomas  Coke, 
pp.  43,  60. 

63  Journal  of  Francis  Asbury,  II,  219,  248.  In  1796  the  General 
Conference  voted  that  any  member  using  or  selling  ardent  spirits 
might  be  censured  or  suspended  at  the  discretion  of  the  local  preacher. 
Journals  of  the  General  Conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church, 
I,  28. 


68  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

of  it  is  persisted  in,  it  quite  ruins  the  health,  destroys  the 
strength,  introduces  decay  of  nature,  and  hastens  death 
faster  than  hard  labour.”  But  higher  concerns  than  those 
relating  to  the  physical  being  demanded  consideration.  In¬ 
temperance  was  equally  harmful  to  the  things  of  the  spirit. 
It  deprived  its  victim  of  all  sense  of  religious  duties,  removed 
him  from  the  sanctifying  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
made  it  impossible  for  him  to  share  in  the  heavenly  inherit¬ 
ance.  Therefore,  the  servants  of  Christ  were  under  com¬ 
pulsion  to  bear  witness,  even  in  the  face  of  popular 
displeasure,  against  so  grievous  a  destroyer.64 

The  leaven  of  social  reform  works  slowly,  but  during  the 
last  decade  of  the  eighteenth  century  there  were  indications 
that  it  was  beginning  to  permeate  the  mass.  From  Litch¬ 
field  County,  Connecticut,  Oliver  Wolcott,  Sr.,  wrote  to  his 
son  regarding  a  new  plan  designed  “to  reform  a  practice 
which  leads  many  to  poverty,  distress  and  ruin.”  The  result 
was  the  formation  in  1789  of  a  voluntary  association  of 
forty  prominent  citizens,  who  pledged  themselves  to  carry 
on  their  respective  business  interests  without  the  use  of 
distilled  spirits,  and  to  serve  their  workmen  only  mild  bev¬ 
erages  such  as  beer  and  cider.  This  association,  significant 
as  the  first  organized  abstinence  from  ardent  spirits,  pre¬ 
pared  the  way  for  the  efficient  work  of  Lyman  Beecher  a 
generation  later.65  It  enrolled  in  its  membership  such  in¬ 
fluential  men  as  Tapping  Reeve,  Frederick  Wolcott,  Daniel 
Sheldon  and  Benjamin  Tallmadge,  whose  temperance  efforts 
bore  fruit  during  the  life-time  of  their  children.  A  pledge, 
similar  to  the  Litchfield  obligation,  was  circulated  in  Nelson 
County,  Virginia,  in  1800  and  received  the  signatures  of 

64  Sermon  preached  at  Templeton,  Mass.,  January  28,  1776,  by 
Rev.  Ebenezer  Sparhawk.  Ms.  in  possession  of  Dean  H.  E.  Hawkes  of 
Columbia  College. 

65  Alain  C.  White,  History  of  the  Town  of  Litchfield,  Conn.,  pp. 
157-158,  185-186;  G.  F.  Clark,  History  of  the  Temperance  Reformation 
in  Massachusetts,  p.  5;  Orcutt,  History  of  Torrington,  p.  207. 


VOICES  IN  THE  WILDERNESS  69 

many  farmers  in  the  district.  The  agricultural  almanac, 
that  indispensable  manual  of  a  century  ago,  carried  to 
many  rural  households  words  of  caution  in  regard  to  the 
use  of  intoxicants.66  An  increasing  number  of  newspaper 
editors,  while  advertising  in  the  columns  of  their  publications 
a  choice  selection  of  beverages,  found  space  for  sentiments 
distinctly  hostile  to  their  advertisers’  business  interests.67 
The  efforts  of  the  clergy  were  re-enforced  by  the  work  of 
certain  teachers,  who  were  interested  in  more  than  the 
intellectual  attainments  of  their  pupils.  At  Yale  Timothy 
Dwight  attempted  to  persuade  the  undergraduates  to  aban¬ 
don  their  traditional  drinking  festivals.  His  descriptive 
sermons  on  the  nature,  causes  and  evils  of  drunkenness  con¬ 
stituted  a  solemn  warning  that  the  road  to  excess  began  with 
moderate  drinking.  In  President  Dwight’s  mind,  sobriety 
was  associated  with  the  fundamental  principles  of  Federal¬ 
ism,  and  he  sought  to  enlist  the  college  in  the  support  of 
both.68 

Unusual  attention  was  focused  on  the  liquor  question 
during  the  early  years  of  the  national  government  by  the 
Congressional  debates  concerning  the  new  revenue  system. 
Madison’s  proposal  to  impose  a  special  duty  on  distilled 
spirits  of  foreign  origin  precipitated  a  heated  argument  over 
the  purpose  and  effect  of  such  a  tax.  Some,  like  Boudinot 
of  New  Jersey,  welcomed  it  as  a  discouragement  to  importa¬ 
tion  which  would  ultimately  prove  beneficial  to  the  morals  of 
the  people,  but  Ames  of  Massachusetts  and  Lawrence  of 
New  York  ridiculed  the  idea  of  mingling  morality  with  the 
collection  of  revenue.  “If  any  man  supposes,”  said  Fisher 
Ames,  “that  a  mere  law  can  turn  the  taste  of  a  people  from 
ardent  spirits  to  malt  liquors,  he  has  a  most  romantic  notion 

66  G.  L.  Kittredge,  The  Old  Farmer  and  His  Almanack,  p.  315. 

67  For  example  see  extracts  from  the  Wyndham  County  Herald, 
1797-1800,  in  Larned,  History  of  Wyndham  County,  Conn.,  pp.  390-391. 

68  J.  Marsh,  Temperance  Recollections,  pp.  10-11. 


70  the  origins  of  prohibition 

of  legislative  power.”  69  That  scores  of  Americans  enter¬ 
tained  this  “romantic  notion”  was  evident  from  the  petitions 
and  memorials  forwarded  to  Congress  during  the  course  of 
the  debates.70  Out  of  the  mass  of  conflicting  opinions  in 
regard  to  an  excise  tax,  one  petition  stood  as  the  expression 
of  a  new  attitude  toward  spirituous  liquors,  which  was 
rapidly  gaining  popular  approval.  On  December  29,  1790, 
the  College  of  Physicians  of  Philadelphia  sent  a  memorial  to 
the  Senate  and  House  of  Representatives,  which  stated  that 
“the  habitual  use  of  distilled  spirits,  in  any  case  whatever, 
is  wholly  unnecessary;  that  they  neither  fortify  the  body 
against  the  morbid  effects  of  heat  or  cold,  nor  render  labour 
more  easy  or  productive;  and  that  there  are  many  articles 
of  diet  and  drink,  which  are  not  only  safe  and  perfectly 
salutary,  but  preferable  to  distilled  spirits,  for  the  above- 
mentioned  purposes.”  71 

The  memorialists  placed  their  hopes  in  the  wisdom  and 
power  of  Congress  to  impose  such  heavy  duties  that  intem¬ 
perance  would  be  restrained.  In  their  appeal  to  the  legisla¬ 
tive  power  they  were  far  ahead  of  their  times,  but  in  their 
refutation  of  popular  misconceptions  in  regard  to  ardent 
spirits  they  were  prophets  of  the  immediate  future.  One  of 
their  number,  Benjamin  Rush,  already  an  influential  advo¬ 
cate  of  temperance,  was  destined  to  see  his  theories  accepted 
as  the  principles  of  the  first  temperance  society,  definitely 
organized  as  such,  in  the  United  States. 

68  Gales  and  Seaton,  Debates  in  Congress,  I,  107  et  seq. 

to  Annals  of  Congress,  II,  1740,  1838,  1791;  Pa.  Arch.,  Second  series, 
IV,  19,  22,  30. 

7i  American  State  Papers,  Miscellaneous,  I,  20. 


CHAPTER  IV 


A  PHILADELPHIA  PHYSICIAN 

In  1778,  while  Washington  was  perplexed  by  the  problem 
of  conserving  man-power  until  the  arrival  of  French  troops, 
the  physician-general  of  the  Middle  Department  of  the 
Continental  Army  published  a  treatise  entitled  Directions 
for  Preserving  the  Health  of  Soldiers.  It  contained  a 
warning  to  the  troops  under  his  care  against  the  excessive 
use  of  spirituous  liquors.  The  physician-general  at  the  time 
was  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush,  a  distinguished  Philadelphia  prac¬ 
titioner,  who  had  already  established  a  reputation  as  a 
medical  authority.  Fifteen  years  before  he  had  completed 
his  preparatory  work  at  Nassau  Hall  and  under  the  guidance 
of  Dr.  John  Redman  in  Philadelphia  had  given  such  promise 
of  future  achievement  that  his  friends  had  persuaded  him 
to  study  in  Europe.  He  spent  three  interesting  and 
valuable  years  after  1766  in  England,  Scotland  and  France, 
devoting  himself  conscientiously  to  scientific  research,  but 
finding  time  to  broaden  his  interests  by  association  with 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  Samuel  Johnson,  Oliver  Goldsmith, 
Diderot  and  the  younger  Mirabeau.  Having  received  his 
degree  in  medicine  from  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  he 
returned  to  America  in  1769  and  accepted  a  professorship  of 
chemistry  in  the  College  of  Philadelphia.  Academic  and 
professional  duties  did  not  prevent  him  from  taking  an  active 
part  in  public  affairs.  His  sympathy  for  the  patriot  cause 
was  repeatedly  manifested  during  the  events  immediately 
preceding  the  Revolutionary  War.  In  1776  Pennsylvania 
sent  him  to  the  Second  Continental  Congress,  where  he  added 

71 


72  the  origins  of  prohibition 

his  signature  to  the  Declaration  of  Independence.  But  his 
career  as  a  legislator  was  not  prolonged,  for  in  1777  he 
resigned  his  membership  in  Congress  to  become  physician- 
general  in  charge  of  hospitals  in  the  Middle  Department.1 

In  his  new  position  Dr.  Rush  had  an  opportunity  to  study 
the  liquor  question  from  an  interesting  angle.  It  was  a 
subject  to  which  he  had  given  much  thought  while  a  student 
at  the  University  of  Edinburgh  and  later  while  teaching  in 
Philadelphia.  As  a  practising  physician,  he  had  taken  time 
to  observe  carefully  the  effect  of  intemperance  upon  the 
mental  and  physical  faculties.  His  treatise  addressed  to 
the  army  contained  the  conclusions  drawn  from  this  study 
and  observation.  In  it  he  refuted  the  beliefs,  common  to 
most  men  of  his  day,  that  ardent  spirits  relieved  fatigue, 
sustained  hard  labour  and  protected  one  against  heat  and 
cold.  His  main  theme  was  that  fevers  and  jaundices,  the 
usual  accompaniment  of  the  soldier’s  life,  were  aggravated 
rather  than  relieved  by  the  use  of  distilled  liquor.  He  was 
convinced  that  certain  diseases  of  the  camp  were  directly 
traceable  to  the  practice  of  serving  spirit  rations  to  the 
men.  Therefore,  he  recommended  that  beer  and  ale  replace 
the  more  intoxicating  beverages.  Although  his  findings  and 
recommendations  effected  no  change  in  army  policy,  they 
served  as  a  basis  for  his  later  writings  in  more  scientific 
vein.2 

Retiring  from  a  distinguished  public  service,  Rush  gained 
even  greater  fame  by  his  original  contributions  to  the  theory 
and  practice  of  medicine.  At  a  time  when  most  scientists 
and  philosophers  maintained  that  the  mental  faculty  was  not 
connected  with  the  physical,  he  strove  diligently  to  show 

1  William  Staughton,  An  Eulogium  in  memory  of  the  late  Dr. 
Benjamin  Rush,  passim;  A  Memorial  containing  travels  through  life 
of  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush,  L.  A.  Biddle,  ed.,  pp.  16-57 ;  David  Ramsay, 
An  Eulogium  upon  Benjamin  Rush,  passim. 

2  Benjamin  Rush,  Directions  for  Preserving  the  Health  of  Soldiers 
(Reprint  in  The  Military  Surgeon,  March,  1908). 


A  PHILADELPHIA  PHYSICIAN 


73 

the  intimate  relation  between  the  two.  The  cure  of  mental 
diseases,  just  beginning  to  receive  attention  from  the  medical 
profession,  interested  him  more  than  any  other  part  of  his 
work.  By  careful  analysis  of  numerous  cases  brought  to  his 
attention,  and  by  shrewd  speculation  on  the  nature  of  nervous 
disorders,  he  formulated  a  hypothesis  wThich  seemed  satis¬ 
factory.  He  incorporated  it  in  his  greatest  work,  The 
Influence  of  Physical  Causes  upon  the  Moral  Faculty ,  which 
was  a  demonstration  of  the  causal  relation  between  physical 
disability  and  mental  or  moral  abnormality.  This  attempt 
to  explain  religious  hysteria,  melancholia  and  other  nervous 
disorders  in  terms  of  some  bodily  ailment  shocked  the  age  in 
which  Rush  lived.  The  Philadelphia  physician,  however, 
continued  to  develop  his  theory  as  far  as  popular  prejudice 
and  his  own  limitations  would  permit.  From  a  constantly 
increasing  number  of  cases  he  gathered  evidence  which  seemed 
to  show  that  almost  every  instance  of  mental  abnormality 
could  be  traced  to  a  diseased  condition  of  the  physical 
organism.  He  was  equally  sure  that  the  mental  faculty  was 
responsible  for  certain  apparent  physical  afflictions.3 

As  an  important  by-product  of  this  study  of  mental 
diseases,  Dr.  Rush  clarified  his  ideas  with  regard  to  the  use 
of  spirituous  liquors.  In  1784  he  published  a  pamphlet, 
An  Inquiry  into  the  Effects  of  Spirituous  Liquors  on  the 
Human  Body  and  Mind,  which  contained  a  clear  exposition 
of  the  properties  of  alcohol.  From  his  medical  experience 
he  cited  cases  of  disease,  nervous  affection  and  mental  de¬ 
rangement  caused  by  the  excessive  use  of  intoxicants.  In 
each  case  he  outlined  in  scientific  fashion  the  manner  in  which 
the  individual  was  affected.  From  the  specific  instance  he 
reasoned  inductively  to  the  general  proposition  that  even 
the  moderate  use  of  distilled  spirits,  if  long  continued,  would 

3  For  an  excellent  discussion  of  this  phase  of  his  work  see  “Ben¬ 
jamin  Rush  and  Mental  Healing”  in  Woodridge  Riley,  American 
Thought  from  Puritanism  to  Pragmatism,  pp.  104-117. 


74  the  origins  of  prohibition 

result  in  serious  complications.  Hence,  he  advised  his 
readers  to  imitate  the  sober  Germans,  who  relied  almost 
entirely  on  malt  beverages  of  a  harmless  character.  He 
believed  that  temperance  would  be  achieved  when  ardent 
spirits  were  abandoned  for  beer  and  light  wdnes.  “A  Moral 
and  Physical  Thermometer”  was  appended  to  the  Inquiry, 
which  indicated  that  “small  beer”  led  to  long  life  and  happi¬ 
ness,  that  cider  and  wine,  when  taken  in  moderate  quantities, 
produced  strength  and  cheerfulness,  while  punch  and  drams 
opened  the  way  to  debtor’s  prison  or  the  gallows.4 

At  harvest  time  each  year  Rush  republished  and  circulated 
this  essay  in  the  hope  that  farmers  might  be  persuaded  to 
abandon  the  practice  of  furnishing  liquor  as  part  of  the 
day’s  wage.5  Nor  was  he  alone  in  placing  his  work  before 
the  public.  Portions  of  the  essay  were  copied  by  news¬ 
papers  throughout  the  country,  and  the  compilers  of  al¬ 
manacs  were  glad  to  include  his  comments  on  the  alleged 
medicinal  and  food  value  of  ardent  spirits.  So  convincing 
were  his  conclusions  and  so  ably  stated  that  the  tract  con¬ 
tinued  to  be  the  stock  in  trade  of  temperance  writers  long 
after  its  first  publication.6 

Dr.  Rush  was  highly  gratified  by  what  he  considered  the 
immediate  and  widespread  acceptance  of  his  views.  He 
wrote  in  1788  to  Jeremy  Belknap,  his  associate  in  numer¬ 
ous  philanthropic  enterprises,  that  the  essay  on  ardent 
spirits  was  making  many  converts.  Associations  were  form¬ 
ing  throughout  Pennsylvania,  pledged  to  discontinue  the  use 

*  An  Inquiry  into  the  Effects  of  Ardent  Spirits  on  the  Human 
Body  and  Mind.  This  is  the  title  of  the  1811  edition.  In  the  Inquiry 
appears  a  revolting  picture  of  drunkenness.  Dr.  Rush  compares  the 
drunkard  to  the  calf  in  folly,  the  ass  in  stupidity,  the  skunk  in  fetor, 
the  hog  in  filthiness,  and  the  tiger  in  cruelty. 

6  Belknap  Papers,  III,  403. 

6  Reminiscences  of  Neal  Dote,  pp.  163-164;  John  Marsh,  Temperance 
Recollections,  p.  11;  Ebenezer  Porter,  The  Fatal  Effects  of  Ardent 
Spirits ;  John  Watson,  An  Alarming  Portraiture. 


A  PHILADELPHIA  PHYSICIAN  7 5 

of  liquor  during  the  harvest  season.  Proprietors  of  country 
stores  were  refusing  to  buy  and  sell  intoxicants.  The 
Quakers  and  Methodists  were  taking  the  lead  in  the  work  of 
reform  in  every  community  where  they  were  numerically 
strong.  In  view  of  the  propitious  beginning,  Rush  felt  free 
to  call  upon  his  friend  to  join  him  in  a  pretentious  campaign 
of  education.  He  believed  that  if  the  force  of  the  press 
in  all  sections  of  the  country  could  be  brought  to  bear  upon 
the  problem  of  intemperance,  the  evil  would  be  speedily 
eradicated.  To  that  end  he  suggested  that  Belknap  super¬ 
vise  the  work  in  New  England,  while  their  mutual  friend. 
Dr.  David  Ramsay  of  South  Carolina,  would  attend  to 
publicity  in  the  South.  He  felt  sure  that  the  South  Carolina 
physician  would  welcome  the  formation  of  such  a  triumvirate, 
and  that  success  would  not  be  long  deferred.  Indeed,  Rush 
was  so  sanguine  that  he  prophesied  a  drunkard  in  1915 
would  be  “as  infamous  as  a  lyar  or  a  thief,  and  the  use  of 
spirits  as  uncommon  in  families  as  a  drink  made  of  a  solution 
of  arsenic  or  a  decoction  of  hemlock.” 

The  enthusiast  did  not  mistake  his  men.  Belknap  kept 
up  a  constant  correspondence  with  him  on  the  subject, 
discussing  methods  and  results  in  New  England.7  The 
letters  of  Rush  reflected  the  abounding  faith  of  their  author 
in  the  ultimate  success  of  the  cause.  In  1789  he  wrote  that 
less  rum  would  be  used  in  New  Jersey,  Delaware  and  Mary¬ 
land  than  during  the  previous  year.  He  had  succeeded  in 
interesting  the  Methodist  Conference,  and  was  busy  per¬ 
suading  the  Presbyterians  and  Episcopalians  to  take  action 
against  the  use  of  ardent  spirits.  A  recent  letter  to  Bishop 
Carroll  of  the  Baltimore  diocese,  he  believed,  would  start 
an  association  among  the  Catholics.8  But  Belknap  viewed 
the  situation  through  darker  glasses.  On  July  29,  1789,  he 
wrote  to  Rush : 

T  Belknap  Papert,  III,  403-404,  416—417,  419-420,  426. 

»Ibid.,  Ill,  435-436. 


76  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

With  respect  to  spirituous  liquors  I  believe  some  good  has  been 
done,  but  much  more  remains  to  be  done.  The  distilleries  here 
[Boston]  are  so  ready  a  source  of  gain,  that  till  the  auri  sacra 
fames  shall  cease  to  be  a  ruling  passion,  I  fear  there  will  no  end 
be  put  to  them.  The  demand  from  abroad,  I  am  told,  increases, 
particularly  from  the  north  of  Europe,  and  while  the  stills  are 
kept  going  there  will  be  a  large  home  consumption.  In  an  ex¬ 
cursion  of  about  80  miles  into  the  country  a  few  weeks  ago,  I 
met  many  loads  of  pot  and  pearl  ashes  coming  down,  and  on 
my  return  the  teams  which  I  met  were  loaded  with  dry  fish,  hogs¬ 
heads  of  salt  and  barrels  of  rum.  The  thirst  for  spirits  in  the 
back  country  is  so  ardent,  that  in  the  fall  and  winter  they  will 
sell  their  wheat  for  this  sort  of  pay,  and  then  in  the  spring  and 
summer  go  40  or  50  miles  after  bread.9 

.Of  a  sort  with  this  discouraging  account  was  Dr.  Ram¬ 
say’s  opinion  of  conditions  in  South  Carolina.  One  can 
understand  what  was  in  his  mind  from  the  description,  which 
he  included  in  his  history  of  the  state,  published  in  1808. 
In  regard  to  intemperance,  he  wrote : 

Drunkenness  may  be  called  an  endemic  vice  of  Carolina.  The 
climate  disposes  to  it,  and  the  combined  influence  of  religion  and 
education,  too  often  fail  to  restrain  it.  .  .  .  Several  persons  are 
contented  with  the  beverage  of  nature,  and  maintain  good  health 
and  spirits  without  artificial  liquor;  but  a  much  greater  number 
drink  water  only  when  they  can  get  nothing  else.  The  most 
harmless  substitute  that  has  been  found  for  that  pure  element  is 
beer.  This  communicates  strength  while  it  quenches  thirst,  and 
in  its  most  common  forms  does  not  really  intoxicate.  Un¬ 
fortunately  for  Carolinians,  cheap  fermented  liquors  do  not  suit 
with  their  climate,  especially  in  the  summer  when  they  are  most 
wanted.  Recourse  is  generally  had  to  spirituous  liquors;  medical 
theories  are  made  to  bend  to  appetite.  Accommodating  profes¬ 
sional  men  by  their  example  and  advice,  recommend  it  as  a  cor¬ 
rector  of  water.  Such  opinions  are  readily  received  and  acted 
upon.  The  general  proposition  being  once  admitted  that  the 

9  Belknap  Peepers,  III,  440. 


A  PHILADELPHIA  PHYSICIAN  77 

addition  of  rum,  brandy  or  whiskey  is  an  improvement  of  water, 
it  is  no  easy  matter  to  stop  at  the  precise  point  of  temperance.10 

The  pessimism  of  Belknap  and  Ramsay  did  not  dampen  the 
ardour  of  Dr.  Rush.  He  continued  to  write,  whenever  he 
had  occasion,  and  on  his  professional  calls  he  constantly 
bore  witness  against  intemperance.  Manasseh  Cutler,  who 
stopped  for  a  few  days  in  Philadelphia  on  his  way  to  Ohio, 
noticed  that  Rush  never  failed  to  remind  his  patients  of  the 
cause  of  their  illness,  when  he  believed  that  it  was  due  to 
spirituous  liquors.11  Upon  his  acceptance  of  a  professor¬ 
ship  in  the  College  of  Physicians  in  1789,  he  set  to  work  at 
once  to  convince  his  colleagues  and  students  of  the  soundness 
of  his  views,  with  the  result  that  the  faculty  joined  him  in 
petitioning  Congress  to  use  the  taxing  power  as  a  means 
of  suppressing  intemperance.12  His  fame  was  such,  both  in 
Europe  and  America,  that  his  writings  on  any  subject  were 
welcomed  by  the  reading  public.  Realizing  this,  he  repub¬ 
lished  his  essay  on  ardent  spirits  as  often  as  the  editions 
were  exhausted,  always  believing  that  the  seed  of  tem¬ 
perance  would  fall  upon  good  ground  and  bear  fruit. 

A  copy  of  one  of  the  numerous  editions  of  the  essay  finally 
came  into  the  possession  of  Billy  J.  Clark,  a  physician  in  the 
town  of  Moreau,  Saratoga  County,  New  York.  A  careful 
perusal  of  Rush’s  arguments  opened  Clark’s  eyes  to  cir¬ 
cumstances  in  his  own  community,  which  had  never  before 
received  more  than  passing  notice.  As  a  country  doctor, 
belonging  to  that  circle  of  public  servants  whose  ministry 
intimately  acquaints  them  with  conditions  normally  con¬ 
cealed,  he  could  see  beyond  the  particular  diseases  of  his 
patients  to  a  malady  affecting  the  health  of  the  group. 
Moreau  and  the  neighbouring  town  of  Northumberland,  being 

1®  David  Ramsay,  The  History  of  South  Carolina,  II,  391-392. 

11  W.  P.  and  J.  P.  Cutler,  Life  of  Reverend  Manasseh  Cutler,  I,  281. 

12  See  supra  p.  70. 


78  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

centres  for  the  seasonal  activity  of  a  thriving  lumber  busi¬ 
ness,  were  largely  populated  by  lumber-jacks,  who  sought 
compensation  for  the  discomfort  and  hardship  of  their  em¬ 
ployment  in  generous  potations  of  rum  or  other  spirits.  In 
his  professional  visits  to  the  families  of  these  men,  Dr.  Clark 
was  constantly  confronted  by  the  disastrous  effects  of  in¬ 
temperance  upon  health  and  morals.  Confirmation  of 
Rush’s  theories  in  his  own  experience  convinced  him  that 
some  action  was  necessary  to  alter  prevailing  drinking 
customs.  Accordingly,  he  sought  an  ally  in  his  minister, 
Lebbeus  Armstrong,  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church, 
and  together  they  worked  out  what  seemed  to  be  a  practicable 
plan  of  reform.  On  the  evening  of  April  30,  1808,  they 
called  a  meeting  in  the  local  school-house,  which  was  attended 
by  forty-three  of  their  fellow  townsmen.  All  present  were 
favourably  impressed  by  the  plans  for  an  organization  to 
combat  intemperate  drinking  and  none  refused  to  sign  the 
constitution  of  the  new  society.  The  membership  of  the 
Temperance  Society  of  Moreau  and  Northumberland  was 
thus  pledged  to  use  “no  rum,  gin,  wdiisky,  wine  or  any 
distilled  spirits,  or  compositions  of  the  same,  except  by 
advice  of  a  physician,  or  in  case  of  actual  disease.”  It  was 
also  agreed  that  each  member  would  use  his  influence  to 
restrict  the  use  of  liquor  among  the  labouring  class  of  the 
community.13 

This  was  no  iron-clad  pledge,  but  in  spite  of  its  manifest 
incompleteness  it  marked  the  signers  as  founders  of  a  new 
enterprise.  Living  in  a  typical  community,  which  regarded 
ardent  spirits  as  a  preventive  of  disease,  which  could  not 
build  a  house,  cut  down  a  field  of  grain,  hold  a  husking,  log¬ 
rolling,  quilting,  christening,  wedding  or  funeral  without 
some  assistance  from  alcohol,  the  society’s  charter  members 
must  have  felt  considerable  misgiving  about  their  experiment. 
They  had  agreed,  however,  to  test  the  new  principles  for  a 

is  Lebbeus  Armstrong,  The  Temperance  Reformation,  pp.  22-23. 


A  PHILADELPHIA  PHYSICIAN  79 

period  of  one  year.  When  the  first  annual  meeting  was 
held  in  conformity  with  the  constitutional  provision,  the 
spirit  of  wonder  at  the  year’s  success  was  so  pervading  that 
the  gathering  became  an  experience  meeting  of  the  revival 
type.  Everyone  was  eager  to  give  testimony.  As  soon  as 
Mr.  Armstrong’s  prepared  address  had  been  delivered,  each 
member  related  the  effect  of  the  pledge  upon  his  household. 
An  extract  from  the  statement  of  Captain  Isaac  B.  Payn, 
wealthy  farmer  and  lumber  merchant,  reveals  the  dominant 
tone : 

A  hogshead  of  rum  each  year  [he  said]  has  been  consumed  in 
my  business  concerns,  to  say  nothing  of  the  wines,  cordials  and 
other  liquors  consumed  by  the  family,  their  parties  and  visiting 
friends.  After  signing  the  temperance  pledge  a  year  ago,  in¬ 
stead  of  a  hogshead,  I  purchased  a  five-gallon  keg  of  rum,  for  my 
whole  business  concerns,  both  farming  and  lumber,  and  my  reason 
for  doing  this  was,  because  my  business  required  a  few  excellent 
labourers,  not  one  of  whose  help  I  could  obtain  without  some 
liquor.  During  the  year  past,  I  have  exerted  the  best  influence 
in  my  power  to  reduce  the  quantity  of  liquor  required  by  them  to 
the  lowest  possible  mark.  This  morning  I  examined  my  keg 
of  liquor,  and,  as  nearly  as  I  could  judge,  without  accurate 
measurement,  the  keg  was  half  full.  We  have  abandoned  all 
kinds  of  liquor  in  the  family  as  a  beverage,  and  the  quantity 
used  among  my  labourers  of  the  year  past,  has  been  reduced 
from  a  hogshead  to  the  half  of  a  five-gallon  keg  of  rum,  and  my 
business  was  never  better  performed  nor  to  greater  satisfac¬ 
tion.14 

Captain  Payn’s  surprise  that  he  had  been  able  to  carry 
on  his  business  enterprises  without  the  use  of  ardent  spirits 
was  shared  by  all  the  members,  but  it  soon  changed  to  a 
conviction  that  the  effect  of  intoxicants  on  labour  efficiency 
was  the  strongest  argument  that  could  be  presented  in 
support  of  temperance.  It  was  the  sense  of  the  society  that 

1*  Armstrong,  op  cit.,  pp.  21-22. 


80  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

this  point  should  be  particularly  stressed  in  all  educational 
propaganda.  Accordingly,  pamphlets  and  broadsides  were 
prepared  for  circulation  in  neighbouring  districts,  explain¬ 
ing  the  purpose  of  the  new  organization  and  its  claims  for 
support.  Farmers  were  urged  to  abandon  the  use  of  liquor 
in  their  work,  as  there  was  overwhelming  proof  that  the 
employer  of  labour  lost  money  by  furnishing  his  employees 
with  intoxicants.  The  material  for  these  literary  appeals 
was  taken  largely  from  the  theories  of  Dr.  Rush  and  the  ex¬ 
perience  of  members  of  the  society.  This  early  work  at 
Moreau  was  significant  because  it  set  the  form  for  future 
temperance  organizations  in  all  parts  of  the  country.  The 
pledge  against  ardent  spirits,  partially  compromising  with 
existing  customs ;  the  constitution,  providing  for  a  continu¬ 
ing  organization  and  stated  meetings ;  the  appeal  to  the 
public  through  speeches  and  pamphlets ;  all  became  charac¬ 
teristic  of  the  societies  of  the  next  generation.15 

But  the  enlightening  propaganda  that  issued  from  Moreau 
did  not  effect  any  sudden  change  in  sentiment  throughout 
the  state.  Although  Sidney  Berry,  surrogate  of  Saratoga 
County,  the  first  president  of  the  society,  directed  affairs 
with  great  skill  and  established  in  1809  an  organization  in 
the  neighbouring  town  of  Greenfield,  the  time  was  not  right 
for  any  general  acceptance  of  temperance  principles.  Such 
support  as  came  to  the  cause,  from  a  distant  section  of  the 
state,  was  unrelated  to  the  Moreau  Society.  Again,  it  was 
the  work  of  Dr.  Rush  bearing  fruit.  The  pamphlet  on 
ardent  spirits  had  this  time  fallen  into  the  hands  of  Lyman 
Beecher,  pastor  of  the  church  at  East  Hampton,  Long 
Island.  It  made  a  profound  impression  on  a  mind  already 
disturbed  by  conditions  within  the  parish.  Meditation  on 
15  For  details  see  Ingraham,  “The  Birth  at  Moreau  of  the  Temper¬ 
ance  Reformation,”  New  York  State  Historical  Association,  Proceed¬ 
ings,  VI,  115-133.  Though  the  pledge  placed  wine  under  the  ban,  ardent 
spirits  were  the  chief  object  of  the  society’s  attack. 


A  PHILADELPHIA  PHYSICIAN 


81 

the  subject  resulted  in  Beecher’s  decision  that  it  was  his 
duty  to  turn  the  power  of  his  pulpit  oratory  against  existing 
drinking  customs.  Much  of  his  past  experience  entered  into 
this  decision,  for  he  could  remember  that  his  parents,  unlike 
most  of  their  Connecticut  neighbours,  had  never  permitted 
spirits  in  their  home.  As  a  student  at  Yale,  during  the 
administration  of  President  Dwight,  he  had  been  indignant 
at  the  intemperate  habits  of  his  fellows,  rebuking  them  for 
the  profanity,  gambling  and  licentiousness  that  went  with 
their  drunkenness.  The  influence  of  unscrupulous  dealers 
in  his  parish  of  East  Hampton  slowly  aroused  him  to  attack 
the  growing  evil.  Like  Dr.  Rush  he  based  his  denuncia¬ 
tion  upon  the  effect  of  ardent  spirits  on  the  body  and  mind 
of  the  drinker,  stating  with  great  clarity  the  horrible 
consequences  which  followed  even  moderate  indulgence.10 
Beecher’s  position  was  ably  seconded  by  his  colleague  in 
the  Long  Island  Presbytery,  Nathaniel  S.  Prime,  who  opened 
the  meeting  of  the  presbytery  on  November  5,  1811,  with  a 
sermon  devoted  entirely  to  an  exposition  of  the  pernicious 
effects  of  intemperance.17  These  pioneers  were  but  a  year 
ahead  of  general  sentiment  in  their  denomination,  for  in  1812 
the  Presbyterian  General  Assembly,  meeting  at  Philadelphia, 
appointed  a  committee  to  devise  ways  and  means  of  re¬ 
stricting  the  use  of  intoxicants. 

So  in  his  last  years  Benjamin  Rush  was  happy  to  see 
the  first  organization  begin  its  work  toward  “an  extirpation 
of  the  use  of  spirituous  liquors,”  a  task  to  which  he  had 
dedicated  himself  twenty  years  before.  The  widespread 
aid  which  he  had  expected  from  various  religious  bodies  had 
not  been  forthcoming,  but  each  year  more  ministers  and 

is  Lyman  Beecher,  Autobiography,  I,  25,  43,  177.  These  sermons  were 
preached  between  1806  and  1809. 

ii  Nathaniel  S.  Prime,  A  Sermon  delivered  at  the  opening  of  the 
Presbytery  of  Long  Island,  November  5,  1811.  Prime’s  indebtedness  to 
Rush  is  acknowledged  in  the  sermon. 


82  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

physicians  were  publicly  championing  his  views.  In  1813, 
the  year  of  his  death,  as  if  the  mantle  of  leadership  were 
passing  from  him,  a  concerted  effort  was  begun  by  influen¬ 
tial  New  England  clergymen  to  effect  the  object  so  near  to 
his  heart. 


CHAPTER  V 


SAVING  SOCIETY 

During  the  decade  following  the  ratification  of  the  Constitu¬ 
tion  the  conservative  New  Englander  came  to  abhor  two 
things — deism  and  democracy.  He  associated  both  with  the 
excesses  of  the  French  Revolution  and  confused  both  with 
Gallic  materialism  at  its  worst.  The  one  was  the  assertion 
of  a  heresy  in  politics,  the  other  the  denial  of  everything 
orthodox  in  religion.  Each  found  personification  in  Thomas 
Jefferson,  for  the  Virginia  statesman  subscribed  to  a  philos¬ 
ophy  of  political  equality  and  boasted  of  his  religious 
radicalism.  He  was  at  least  a  follower  of  the  deistic  school; 
many  said  he  was  an  atheist.  He  had  broken  the  power  of 
the  establishment  in  his  native  state.  He  admitted  that  he 
was  an  admirer  of  the  French  philosophers,  among  whom  he 
had  lived  for  five  years.  He  openly  confessed  his  inability 
to  accept  the  tenets  of  revealed  religion.  By  the  Calvinistic 
clergy  of  New  England,  still  powerful  in  affairs  of  state, 
such  a  man  was  feared  only  a  little  less  than  he  was  despised. 

The  political  revolution  of  1800,  indicating  the  triumph 
of  Jeffersonian  principles,  threw  the  champions  of  the  old 
order  into  despair.  Dire  punishment  would  be  visited  upon 
the  nation,  they  asserted,  in  consequence  of  the  election  of 
a  man  who  had  resorted  to  all  the  low  tricks  of  a  demagogue. 
What  sort  of  leadership  would  be  forthcoming  from  a  presi¬ 
dent  who  found  his  support  in  every  common  person  pos¬ 
sessed  of  the  right  to  vote?  His  constant  catering  to  the 

83 


84  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

tastes  of  the  masses  indicated  that  he  would  finally  degrade 
the  whole  nation.  But  what  else  could  one  expect  from  an 
impudent  scoffer  who  lacked  all  sense  of  divine  guidance? 
He  was  no  doubt  bent  upon  destroying  religion  during  his 
presidency.  Immorality  would  then  flourish,  and  the  very 
bonds  of  society  would  be  loosed. 

Although  Thomas  Jefferson  failed  to  play  the  role  of  a 
modern  Jeroboam,  the  staunch  defenders  of  Puritanism  in¬ 
sisted  that  he  was  responsible  for  the  growth  of  impiety  and 
immorality,  which  was  evident  during  his  administrations. 
As  his  party  gained  strength  in  the  towns  of  Massachusetts 
and  Connecticut,  a  general  decline  of  moral  standards  be¬ 
came  evident.  It  was  manifest  in  Sabbath-breaking,  idle 
amusements,  profaneness  and  drunkenness.  When  the  “sage 
of  Monticello”  was  succeeded  in  1809  by  his  fellow-Virginian 
and  political  disciple,  James  Madison,  the  sober-minded  were 
convinced  that  unless  something  was  speedily  done  the  Re¬ 
publican  party  and  Republican  vices  would  overrun  the  last 
stronghold  of  Federalism  and  virtue.  It  was  imperative 
that  strong  men  come  forward  to  spike  up  the  rafters  of 
the  social  edifice  and  prevent  its  complete  collapse. 

In  Connecticut  the  leader  of  political  reform  and  moral 
regeneration  was  Lyman  Beecher.  Having  entered  upon  a 
pastorate  at  Litchfield  in  1811,  he  transferred  his  temperance 
activities  to  the  new  field  with  the  determination  that  his 
efforts  should  effect  some  changes  in  local  customs.  At  his 
first  meeting  with  the  Consociation,  the  assembled  clergy 
enjoyed  their  usual  drinks  in  such  boisterous  fashion  that 
he  was  thoroughly  disgusted  by  what  he  saw.  Of  the  min¬ 
isterial  conduct,  he  wrote :  “As  they  could  not  all  drink  at 
once,  they  were  obliged  to  stand  and  wait  as  people  do  when 
they  go  to  mill.  The  side-board  with  the  spillings  of 
water  and  sugar  and  liquor,  looked  and  smelled  like  the  bar 
of  a  very  active  grog-shop.  None  of  the  Consociation  were 
drunk,  but  that  there  was  not  at  times,  a  considerable  amount 


SAVING  SOCIETY  85 

of  exhilaration,  I  cannot  affirm.”  1  Such  a  situation  moved 
Beecher  to  meditate  upon  the  advisability  of  persuading  his 
associates  to  change  their  habits.  He  went  to  the  General 
Association  meeting  at  Sharon  in  1812  prepared  to  suggest 
some  radical  remedies.  When  the  regular  committee  reported 
that  “after  faithful  and  prayerful  inquiry”  it  was  convinced 
that  nothing  could  be  done  to  check  the  growth  of  intem¬ 
perance,  Beecher  forced  the  appointment  of  a  second  com¬ 
mittee  of  which  he  was  made  chairman.  The  report  of  this 
group  was  couched  in  no  uncertain  terms.  It  recommended 
that  steps  be  taken  to  restrict  the  use  of  ardent  spirits  and 
suggested  the  following  measures :  that  district  assemblies 
abstain  from  the  use  of  ardent  spirits  at  ecclesiastical  meet¬ 
ings,  that  members  of  churches  abstain  from  unlawful  vending 
or  purchase  of  liquor,  that  farmers,  mechanics  and  manu¬ 
facturers  substitute  monetary  compensation  for  the  ration 
of  spirits,  that  voluntary  associations  aid  the  civil  magis¬ 
trates  to  enforce  the  laws,  and  that  the  pamphlet  of  Dr. 
Rush  be  printed  and  circulated.2 

The  recommendation  in  favour  of  voluntary  associations 
contained  an  idea  which  was  the  basis  for  immediate  action. 
Beecher,  like  most  of  the  New  England  divines  of  his  day, 
was  quite  as  much  politician  as  preacher.  He  thought  that 
he  could  see  in  the  deplorable  state  of  public  morals  the 
reasons  for  the  declining  prestige  of  the  clergy  and  the 
waning  power  of  the  Federalist  party.  It  wTas  evident  that 
the  lower  classes  were  becoming  more  arrogant  in  political 
matters  and  bolder  in  their  defiance  of  law.  Unless  some 
organization  was  effected  to  resist  them,  they  would  vote  in 
the  Republican  party  with  its  indiscriminate  following  of  the 
irreverent  and  the  vicious.  A  society  directed  against  two 
outstanding  evils,  the  violation  of  the  Sabbath  and  the  prev- 

1  Autobiography,  I,  245.  This  Consociation  was  the  district  associ¬ 
ation  of  Congregational  and  Presbyterian  clergy. 

2  Beecher,  Autobiography,  I,  246-248. 


86  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

alence  of  intemperance,  seemed  advisable  from  a  political 
standpoint  and  imperative  from  the  standpoint  of  public 
welfare.  To  this  effect  Beecher  wrote  his  colleague,  Asahel 
Hooker  of  New  London,  on  July  28,  1812,  suggesting  that 
preliminary  arrangements  be  made  in  the  autumn  at  New 
Haven.3  A  few  months  later  Yale  College,  a  centre  of 
Federalist  sentiment,  was  host  to  a  group  of  gentlemen 
from  various  parts  of  the  state,  who  discussed  the 
propriety  of  organizing  a  society  for  the  suppression  of 
drunkenness  and  kindred  vices.  In  a  sermon  to  this  gather¬ 
ing  Beecher  sounded  the  keynote  of  the  new  movement. 

Our  institutions,  civil  and  religious  [he  said]  have  outlived 
that  domestic  discipline  and  official  vigilance  in  magistrates 
which  rendered  obedience  easy  and  habitual.  The  laws  are  now 
beginning  to  operate  extensively  upon  necks  unaccustomed  to 
the  yoke,  and  when  they  shall  become  irksome  to  the  majority, 
their  execution  will  become  impracticable.  To  this  situation  we 
are  already  reduced  in  some  districts  of  the  land.  Drunkards 
reel  through  the  streets  day  after  day,  and  year  after  year,  with 
entire  impunity.  Profane  swearing  is  heard,  and  even  by  mag¬ 
istrates  as  though  they  heard  it  not.  .  .  .  But  truly  we  do  stand 
over  the  confines  of  destruction.  The  mass  is  changing.  We 
are  becoming  another  people.* 

At  the  New  Haven  meeting  a  committee  of  twenty-six  was 
appointed  to  formulate  plans  for  a  permanent  organization 
along  the  lines  indicated  by  Beecher’s  sermon.  The  group 
selected  was  a  notable  embodiment  of  political  power  and 
social  prestige,  containing  such  distinguished  clergymen  as 
Calvin  Chapin  of  Hartford,  Heman  Humphrey  of  Fairfield, 
Asahel  Hooker  of  New  London  and  Timothy  Dwight  of  New 
Haven.  The  laity  was  represented  by  the  most  prominent 
Federalist  politicians  in  the  state;  John  Treadwell  and 
Theodore  Dwight  of  Hartford,  Sylvester  Gilbert  of  Tolland, 
s  Autobiography ,  I,  253-254. 

*Ibid.,  I,  255-25C,  261-2G2.  , 


SAVING  SOCIETY  87 

Calvin  Goddard  of  Middlesex,  Tapping  Reeve  of  Litchfield 
and  Roger  Minot  Sherman  of  Fairfield.  Throughout  the 
autumn  and  winter  of  1812  Beecher  kept  up  a  constant 
correspondence  with  his  associates  on  the  committee  and  his 
ministerial  friends  in  the  state,  seeking  to  create  an  effective 
public  opinion  in  support  of  reform.  On  November  24,  he 
wrote  in  a  letter  to  his  friend,  Hooker: 

I  am  persuaded  the  time  has  come  when  it  becomes  every 
friend  of  this  state  to  wake  up  and  exert  his  whole  influence  to 
save  it  from  innovation  and  democracy.  That  the  effort  to  sup¬ 
plant  Governor  Smith  will  be  made  is  certain,  unless  at  an  early 
stage  the  rising  opposition  shall  be  so  great  as  to  deter  them; 
and  if  it  is  made  a  separation  is  made  in  the  Federal  party.  .  .  . 
If  we  stand  idle  we  lose  our  habits  and  institutions  piece-meal, 
as  fast  as  innovation  and  ambition  shall  dare  to  urge  on  the  work. 
If  we  meet  with  strenuous  opposition  in  this  thing  we  can  but 
perish,  and  we  may — I  trust  if  we  look  up  to  God  we  shall — 
save  the  state.  I  only  desire  that  we  may  act  in  his  fear,  and 
not  be  moved  in  so  trying  a  case  by  the  wrath  of  man,  which 
worketh  not  the  righteousness  of  God.  .  .  .  Judge  Reeve  is  en¬ 
gaged  in  the  business  of  organizing  the  general  society,  and  he 
told  me  that  it  met  the  approbation  of  the  judges  at  the  Supreme 
Court.  He  proposes  to  convene  the  committee  at  Middletown  as 
most  central,  at  some  time  which  will  accommodate  the  greatest 
number.5 

The  supporters  of  innovation,  “Sabbath-breakers,  rum¬ 
selling,  tippling  folk,  infidels  and  ruff-scruff,”  as  Beecher 
was  wont  to  call  them,  were  not  confined  to  the  Republican 
ranks,  but  had  already  begun  to  bore  from  within  the  Feder¬ 
alist  party  itself.  As  a  part  of  the  campaign  against  them, 
the  Connecticut  Society  for  the  Reformation  of  Morals  be¬ 
gan  a  fight  for  law  enforcement  on  May  19,  1813.  That 
the  new  society  was  inextricably  connected  with  Federalist 

s  Beecher,  Autobiography,  I,  257-258,  342. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


88 

domination  in  the  state  was  evident  from  the  personnel  of 
officers  and  members.  Its  first  president  was  ex-Governor 
John  Treadwell,  while  one  of  the  vice-presidents  was  Judge 
Tapping  Reeve,  who  controlled  the  county  of  Litchfield. 
On  the  executive  committee  was  Thomas  Day,  secretary  of 
state  under  John  Cotton  Smith,  while  Ebenezer  Huntington, 
Federalist  member  of  Congress,  was  prominent  in  the  so¬ 
ciety’s  councils.  Four  of  the  charter  members  were  Assist¬ 
ants,  and  five  represented  the  state  at  the  Hartford 
Convention.6  In  discussing  the  purpose  of  the  society  at 
a  later  date,  Lyman  Beecher  wrote:  “It  was  the  anticipa¬ 
tion  of  the  impending  revolution  and  the  downfall  of  the 
standing  order  that  impelled  me  to  the  efforts  I  made  at 
that  time  to  avert  it,  and  to  prepare  for  it  in  all  ways  pos¬ 
sible.  And  one  was  this  association  of  the  ‘leading  minds’  of 
the  laity  with  us  in  council,  and  discussing  matters  with  them. 
They  easily  fell  in  with  our  views,  saw  the  things  as  we  did, 
and  threw  in  their  influence  heartily.  I  remember  Roger 
Minot  Sherman  especially  was  pleased.  ‘You  have  never  be¬ 
fore,’  he  said,  ‘done  anything  so  wisely  and  so  well  as  this  !’  ”  7 
The  leaders  of  the  Republican  party  in  Connecticut  quite 
naturally  were  hostile  to  a  society  formed,  it  looked,  for  the 
purpose  of  thwarting  their  political  ambitions.  They  were 
quick  to  see  that  they  were  the  folk  against  whom  Beecher 
and  his  associates  were  marshalling  the  forces  of  respecta¬ 
bility.  Therefore,  they  refused  to  consider  the  Moral  So¬ 
ciety  as  anything  but  a  clever  guise  for  political  intrigue. 
The  idea  of  reform  was  merely  a  cloak  for  sinister  work 
which  could  not  be  done  in  the  open.  They  charged  the 
dominant  Congregational  order  with  deriving  its  support 
from  the  Charitable  Society  under  Judge  Reeve,  the  Bible 

o  Connecticut  Courant,  Dec.  20,  1814;  Conn.  Evangelical  Magazine, 
June,  1815,  p.  225;  Conn.  Courant,  Sept.  7,  1813. 

7  Beecher,  Autobiography ,  I,  2B1.  For  a  brilliant  summary  of  the 
political  situation  in  Connecticut  and  its  relation  to  moral  reform,  see 
Purcell,  Connecticut  in  Transition. 


SAVING  SOCIETY  89 

Society  under  the  patronage  of  Governor  Smith,  and  the 
Moral  Society  guided  by  ex-Governor  Treadwell.  The 
attacks  on  Beecher,  Reeve,  Smith  and  Treadwell  branded 
those  leaders  as  Federalist  politicians  masquerading  in  the 
role  of  benevolent  philanthropists.8  Such  accusations  bore 
a  semblance  of  the  truth,  but  they  ignored  the  fact  that  there 
was  much  real  concern  over  the  growth  of  immorality.  Al¬ 
though  the  members  of  the  Moral  Society  had  taken  no 
pledge  in  regard  to  their  personal  conduct,  they  were  in 
earnest  about  the  suppression  of  drunkenness,  gambling  and 
general  lawlessness.  All  had  agreed  that  they  would  use 
their  influence  in  every  way  possible  to  end  those  vices 
which  were  lowering  the  moral  standards  of  former  days. 

In  the  meantime,  the  Massachusetts  clergy  were  organizing 
their  attack  on  intemperance.  In  the  summer  of  1810  the 
Panoplist,  a  religious  periodical  under  the  editorship  of  the 
distinguished  layman,  Jeremiah  Evarts,  began  to  present 
articles  dealing  w’ith  the  cost  to  the  community  of  the  liquor 
traffic.  The  October  issue  contained  an  essay  by  the  editor, 
entitled  “Arithmetic  Applied  to  Moral  Purposes,”  which 
aroused  considerable  interest  among  the  readers  of  the  paper. 
From  his  observation  of  a  New  England  town  of  less  than 
2,000  population,  Evarts  concluded  that  over  $10,000  was 
spent  annually  by  the  inhabitants  for  ardent  spirits,  more 
than  the  town  invested  in  its  churches  and  its  schools.  He 
challenged  the  wisdom  of  the  expenditure  by  describing  the 
public  improvements  which  could  be  financed  if  the  same  sum 
were  spent  for  the  good  of  the  community.  Similar  articles, 
stressing  the  economic  aspect  of  the  question,  met  with  such 
response  in  the  state  that  Evarts’  services  were  much  in 
demand.9  In  June,  1811,  the  General  Association  of  Massa¬ 
chusetts  made  him  chairman  of  a  committee  to  co-operate 

8  Courant,  March  19,  1816. 

o  Tracy,  Memoir  of  Jeremiah  Evarts,  pp.  75—76;  Panoplist  and  Mis¬ 
sionary  Magazine,  October,  1810. 


90  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

with  similar  committees  from  the  General  Association  of 
Connecticut  and  the  Presbyterian  General  Assembly  in  de¬ 
vising  measures  to  prevent  “some  of  the  numerous  and 
threatening  mischiefs  that  are  experienced  throughout  our 
country  from  the  excessive  and  intemperate  use  of  spirituous 
liquors.”  10  Associated  with  Evarts  were  Samuel  Worcester, 
Jedidiah  Morse,  Abiel  Abbott,  Benjamin  Wadsworth, 
representing  the  clergy,  and  Reuben  D.  Mussey  of  Salem 
and  Joseph  Storey  of  Boston,  both  physicians.  Although 
their  deliberations  resulted  in  no  general  scheme  of  reform 
in  conjunction  with  the  other  committees,  the  Massachusetts 
group  issued  a  call  for  a  state  convention  to  be  held  at  the 
State  House  in  Boston  on  February  4,  1813.  The  response 
to  the  call  was  extremely  gratifying  to  the  friends  of  law 
and  order,  who  succeeded  in  drafting  and  adopting  a  con¬ 
stitution,  creating  the  Massachusetts  Society  for  the  Sup¬ 
pression  of  Intemperance.11 

The  object  of  the  organization,  as  set  forth  in  the  con¬ 
stitution,  was  to  “discountenance  and  suppress  the  too  free 
use  of  ardent  spirits,  and  its  kindred  vices,  profaneness  and 
gaming ;  and  to  encourage  and  promote  temperance  and 
general  morality.”  Each  member  was  pledged  to  “discour¬ 
age  and  prevent,  as  far  as  maybe,  by  his  own  example,  and 
influence,  every  kind  of  vice  and  immorality.”  12  As  in  the 
case  of  the  Connecticut  Moral  Society,  the  restriction  upon 
the  conduct  of  the  members  was  slight,  the  obligations  could 
be  loosely  interpreted,  and  the  membership  did  not  re¬ 
gard  the  constitution  as  laying  upon  them  any  severe  self- 
denial.  The  leadership  of  the  society  was  distinguished. 
Of  the  clergy  Jedidiah  Morse,  Eliphalet  Porter  and  Abiel 
Abbott  were  the  most  active,  while  Jeremiah  Evarts  was 

i°  Documents  and  Records  of  the  Massachusetts  Temperance  Society, 

pp.  1-2. 

11  Documents  and  Records  of  the  Massachusetts  Temperance  Society, 
pp.  3-4;  Panoplist  and  Missionary  Magazine,  September,  1812. 

12  Documents  and  Records,  pp.  5-6. 


SAVING  SOCIETY  91 

the  leading  layman.  With  the  exception  of  Abbott  they 
were  eminent  defenders  of  the  fundamental  dogmas  of 
Calvinism  against  any  form  of  religious  innovation.  When 
Unitarianism  challenged  orthodox  Congregationalism,  they 
were  prepared  to  answer  the  challenge.  Morse,  already 
famous  by  virtue  of  his  books  and  articles  on  geography, 
had  established  the  Panoplist  in  1806  to  answer  the  crit¬ 
ics  of  Calvinism.  Several  years  later,  when  most  of 
the  churches  of  Boston  save  Old  South  had  forsaken  or¬ 
thodoxy,  he  had  borne  a  hand  in  the  organization  of  the 
Park  Street  Church  that  the  conservative  cause  might  be 
strengthened.  His  friend,  Evarts,  became  editor  of  the 
Panoplist  in  1810  and  joined  him  in  his  various  philanthropic 
enterprises.  Eliphalet  Porter  of  Roxbury  was  an  equally 
determined  supporter  of  what  he  understood  to  be  traditional 
Puritanism,  but  Abiel  Abbott,  long  pastor  of  a  church  at 
Beverly,  accepted  the  intellectual  appeal  of  Unitarianism. 
The  clergymen  were  well  supported  by  laymen,  many  of 
whom  were  prominent  Federalist  politicians. 

The  first  president  of  the  society  was  Samuel  Dexter,  who 
had  served  as  a  cabinet  officer  during  John  Adams’  adminis¬ 
tration,  but  had  later  defended  the  policies  of  Jefferson  and 
Madison,  though  he  never  considered  himself  a  Republican. 
His  interest  in  temperance  reform  was  shared  by  Nathan 
Dane,  staunch  in  his  support  of  Federalist  principles. 
Three  members  of  the  society’s  executive  committee  repre¬ 
sented  the  state  at  the  Hartford  Convention;  Timothy 
Bigelow,  William  Prescott  and  Nathan  Dane.  Among  the 
charter  members  were  Timothy  Pickering,  a  cabinet  officer 
in  the  administrations  of  Washington  and  Adams,  who  had 
represented  the  extreme  wing  of  New  England  Federalism  in 
his  opposition  to  the  Louisiana  Purchase,  the  Embargo  and 
the  war  with  England ;  Caleb  Strong,  governor  of  Massa¬ 
chusetts  from  1800  to  1807  and  again  from  1812  to  1816; 
and  Artemas  Ward,  whose  election  to  the  Thirteenth  Con- 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


92 

gress  had  been  due  to  his  opposition  to  the  War  of  1812. 

As  prominent  as  the  politicians  and  the  clergy  were  the 
business  men.  The  first  roster  of  the  Massachusetts  society 
contained  the  names  of  Samuel  T.  Armstrong,  Amos  Law¬ 
rence,  Robert  Rantoul,  John  Tappan  and  Elisha  Ticknor, 
well  known  to  the  commercial  circles  of  Boston  in  1813. 
Armstrong  was  a  wealthy  bookseller,  whose  fortune  gave  him 
an  opportunity  to  spend  time  and  money  in  the  work  of  the 
American  Board  of  Commissioners  for  Foreign  Missions  and 
numerous  charities.  Amos  Lawrence’s  profitable  dry  goods 
business  was  accumulating  capital  for  future  investment  in 
the  manufacture  of  cotton  cloth.  John  Tappan  was  pro¬ 
prietor  of  a  mercantile  establishment,  which  imported  from 
all  parts  of  the  world,  while  Elisha  Ticknor,  having  given 
up  the  headmastership  of  the  Franklin  grammar-school  in 
Boston,  was  preparing  to  establish  the  first  savings  bank  in 
the  city.13  Truly  the  temperance  reform  was  in  the  hands 
of  the  “rich,  the  well-born  and  the  able.”  Officers  and  mem¬ 
bers  alike  appreciated  the  high  character  of  their  calling. 
They  were  conferring  an  inestimable  boon  upon  their  fellow- 
men,  for  they  were  engaged  in  the  task  of  saving  society 
from  one  of  its  besetting  sins.14 

One  of  the  first  circulars  sent  out  by  the  executive  com¬ 
mittee  stated  the  mission  of  the  society  as  it  appeared  to 
the  leaders : 

The  design  of  this  institution  is  not  so  much  to  redeem  the 
slaves  of  intemperance,  as  to  secure  from  the  ignominious  bond- 

13  Biographical  data  are  taken  from  Appleton’s  Cyclopedia  of  Ameri¬ 
can  Biography  and  the  National  Cyclopedia  of  American  Biography. 
It  should  be  noted  in  passing  that  Unitarians  as  well  as  orthodox 
Calvinists  were  represented  in  the  Massachusetts  Society.  Many  Con¬ 
gregational  churches  had  accepted  Unitarianism  before  1813. 

ii  For  lists  of  officers  and  members  in  the  Massachusetts  Society  for 
the  Suppression  of  Intemperance,  see  Documents  and  Records,  pp.  102- 
103. 


SAVING  SOCIETY  93 

age  those  who  are  yet  free;  not  so  much  to  wrest  the  fatal  cup 
from  those  who  are  already  brutalized  and  ruined,  as  to  keep 
sober  those  who  are  sober;  to  check  that  general  free  use  of 
ardent  spirits  which,  though  not  excessive  to  intoxication,  is  yet 
unnecessary,  wasteful  and  pernicious;  to  erect  a  barrier  against 
that  wide-spreading  flood  which  so  fearfully  threatens  the  dear¬ 
est  interests  of  individuals,  of  families  and  of  the  Commonwealth. 
Is  not  this  practicable?  Is  it  not  practicable  to  impress  upon 
the  community  a  deep  sense  and  dread  of  this  great  and  terrible 
evil?  to  combine  a  salutary  influence  against  it  which  can  every¬ 
where  be  felt?  to  render  it  reputable  for  laboring  people,  and 
those  who  employ  labor,  to  substitute  for  daily  use,  good  and 
wholesome  drinks  in  the  place  of  pernicious  liquors;  and  for  all 
classes  of  people  to  refrain  from  the  practice,  now  so  general,  of 
offering  ardent  spirits  to  all  who  come  into  their  houses?  If 
this  be  practicable,  then  our  design  is  practicable;  let  all  this  be 
done  and  our  design  is  well  nigh  accomplished.16 

In  its  attempts  to  accomplish  this  design  the  Massachu¬ 
setts  society  worked  in  close  harmony  with  the  Moral  Society 
in  Connecticut.  Neither  deviated  much  from  the  methods 
earlier  adopted  by  the  temperance  group  in  Moreau,  though 
their  operations  were  on  a  considerably  larger  scale.  Con¬ 
vinced  that  their  first  task  was  that  of  enlightenment,  they 
relied  upon  the  printed  page  to  accomplish  their  purpose. 
The  reports  submitted  at  the  stated  meetings  were  prepared 
for  publication,  and  periodic  appeals  were  sent  to  employers 
of  labour  urging  them  to  abandon  the  use  of  spirituous 
liquors  in  their  enterprises.  Pamphlets,  containing  sermons 
and  addresses,  set  forth  the  causes  of  intemperance  and  por¬ 
trayed  the  dire  effects  upon  the  individual  and  the  group. 
One  of  the  most  popular  of  these  tracts  was  from  the  pen 
of  Mason  L.  Weems,  whose  chief  claim  to  fame  rests  upon 
his  fanciful  biography  of  Washington.  He  had  been  suc¬ 
cessively  an  Episcopalian  clergyman,  travelling  book  agent 

15  Circular  Addressed  to  the  members  of  the  Massachusetts  Society 
for  the  Suppression  of  Intemperance  (1814). 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


94 

for  Matthew  Carey,  the  Philadelphia  publisher,  and  hack¬ 
writer  for  numerous  religious  journals,  but  in  his  later 
years  he  became  an  ardent  expounder  of  moral  truth.  His 
highly  imaginative  writings  against  duelling,  drunkenness 
and  murder  were  in  great  demand  and  furnished  excellent 
material  for  societies  interested  in  moral  reform.  The 
Drunkard' s  Looking  Glass,  reflecting  a  faithful  likeness  of 
the  drunkard  in  sundry  very  interesting  attitudes  appealed 
to  both  young  and  old  and  was  used  by  the  temperance 
organizations,  though  the  woodcuts  which  ornamented  and 
explained  its  pages  must  have  served  to  pique  the  curiosity 
of  its  youthful  readers,  rather  than  to  warn  them  against 
evil.16  Not  having  a  periodical  exclusively  devoted  to  their 
interests,  the  early  societies  relied  upon  the  religious  journals 
to  carry  articles  demonstrating  the  social  consequences  of 
the  use  of  ardent  spirits.17 

These  printed  appeals,  re-enforced  on  occasion  by  personal 
visitation,  enabled  the  state  societies  to  establish  local  aux¬ 
iliaries  throughout  Massachusetts  and  Connecticut,  the 
members  of  which  were  pledged  to  discourage  by  precept  and 
example  such  devastating  sins  as  Sabbath-breaking,  gambling 
and  tippling.  The  auxiliaries,  independent  of  the  central  so¬ 
cieties  in  matters  of  policy,  reported  annually  their  increases 
in  membership  and  the  progress  of  temperance  sentiment  in 
their  respective  communities.  The  tabulation  of  these  re¬ 
ports  indicated  no  striking  change  in  the  popular  attitude 
toward  spirituous  liquors,  but  revealed  a  steadily  growing 
interest  in  the  liquor  problem.  Pulpit  and  press  had  carried 
the  movement  of  reform  far  beyond  the  confines  of  Connccti- 

16  M.  L.  Weems,  The  Drunkard’s  Looking  Glass  (6th  edition,  1818). 

Besides  the  Panoplist,  already  mentioned,  the  following  journals 
were  of  assistance  to  the  reformers:  the  Religious  Remembrancer  (Phil¬ 
adelphia,  1813),  the  Recorder  (Boston,  1816),  the  Christian  Herald 
(New  York,  1816),  and  the  Christian  Disciple,  a  Methodist  weekly 
founded  at  Boston  in  1819.  Panoplist  for  February,  March  and  May, 
1813  contains  statements  of  the  punishment  meted  out  to  drunkards  in 
this  life  and  hereafter. 


SAVING  SOCIETY  95 

cut  and  Massachusetts.  Societies  had  been  organized  in 
Rhode  Island,  New  Hampshire,  Vermont,  Maine,  New  York 
and  Pennsylvania.  From  regions  so  distant  from  the  source 
of  the  movement  as  South  Carolina,  Ohio  and  Illinois  came 
reports  of  efforts  to  enforce  a  higher  standard  of  morals. 
The  countless  thousands,  who  went  out  from  the  towns  and 
farms  of  the  East  to  follow  the  well  beaten  trails  across  the 
mountains,  carried  with  them  the  principles  and  organiza¬ 
tions  of  the  reform.18  Of  the  situation  in  the  western  coun¬ 
try  Thomas  Hinde,  one  of  the  founders  of  Mt.  Carmel, 
Illinois,  wrote  to  a  friend  in  the  East: 

Before  the  commencement  of  the  war  in  1812,  it  appeared  to 
me,  that  the  cause  of  intemperance  had  reached  its  zenith.  It 
was  as  much  as  the  sober,  moral  and  religious  citizens  could 
sustain,  to  bear  up  under  the  evil  works  and  abominable  prac¬ 
tises  ;  but  when  the  war  was  declared  and  the  recruiting  officers 
were  sent  out,  they  swept  the  towns  generally  throughout  the 
west  of  nearly  all  those  pests  of  human  society.  .  .  .  In  1815 
I  belonged  to  an  association  of  different  orders  of  the  religious 
and  of  moral  persons,  that  formed  the  first  temperance  society 
I  ever  heard  of ;  this  was,  however,  termed  a  society  for  the 
suppression  of  vice  and  immorality.  The  temperance  depart¬ 
ment  was  committed  to  the  care  of  my  inexperienced  hands ;  I 
have  now  the  whole  proceedings,  as  published,  preserved  in  a 
book.  This  organization  was  most  miserably  prosecuted,  but  it 
did  much  good.  My  worthy  friend,  Rev.  Robert  G.  Wilson, 
president  of  Ohio  University,  was  our  champion  on  that  oc¬ 
casion;  he  was  firm  and  inflexible  on  all  occasions,  whether  in 
the  cause  of  religion,  morality  or  temperance. 

is  Evidence  of  the  increasing  interest  in  moral  reform  may  be  found 
in  Connecticut  Courant,  June  28,  1815;  Annual  Report  of  the  Massa¬ 
chusetts  Society  for  the  Suppression  of  Intemperance  (1820);  Nathaniel 
S.  Prime,  Address  to  the  Cambridge  Branch  of  the  Moral  Society  of 
Washington  County,  N.  Y.  (1815)  ;  Journal  of  the  American  Temperance 
Union,  February,  1837;  Reminiscences  of  Neal  Dow,  pp.  184-194; 
Morrison,  History  of  Windham,  N.  H.,  pp.  233-234;  Barry,  History  of 
Hanover,  Mass.,  pp.  173-174. 


96  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

Out  of  this  plan  of  a  “Moral  Society”  grew  a  plan  on  which 
this  town  was  established,  as  the  first  town  established  on  tem¬ 
perance  principles  on  earth !  We  never  have  had  any  intem¬ 
perance  amongst  us  scarcely  in  any  way,  except  by  interlopers 
and  stragglers.  The  town  was  laid  out  about  1818,  and  the 
settlements  commenced  in  1820;  and  I  do  not  know  in  any  part 
of  the  United  States  in  the  same  length  of  time,  where  as  many 
of  the  first  settlers  are  alive  and  in  health,  notwithstanding  the 
encountering  of  much  sickness  and  many  deprivations  in  settling 
a  new  country.  The  impetus  thus  given  has  a  wonderful  bear¬ 
ing  on  the  minds  of  the  community.19 


The  years,  which  marked  so  aupicious  a  beginning  for  the 
little  Illinois  community,  brought  to  the  country  as  a  whole 
industrial  depression,  unemployment  and  widespread  desti¬ 
tution.  Inevitable  readjustments  following  the  War  of 
1812,  aggravated  the  disasters  occasioned  by  poor  banking 
methods ;  they  caused  importers,  manufacturers,  landed 
proprietors,  farmers,  and  all  dependent  on  these  classes,  to 
share  in  the  general  distress.  Foreclosures  were  frequent; 
bankruptcies  in  mercantile  circles  attested  the  scarcity  of 
money  and  the  stagnation  of  trade.  The  closing  of  factories 
increased  the  idle  class  and  threw  men  into  prison  because 
of  their  debts.  The  resources  of  charitable  institutions  were 
taxed  to  the  utmost  in  an  attempt  to  care  for  the  unem¬ 
ployed  and  the  families  of  unfortunate  debtors.  But  despite 
these  efforts  the  pauper  and  criminal  classes  steadily  grew. 

Conditions  could  scarcely  have  been  more  favourable  for 
the  growth  of  temperance  sentiment.  Everywhere  crime, 
pauperism  and  drunkenness  prevailed  to  such  an  extent  that 
the  public  welfare  demanded  an  investigation  of  the  forces 
which  burdened  society  with  undesirables.  Charity  organ¬ 
izations  in  New  York,  Philadelphia,  Baltimore  and  Boston 
reported  that  the  use  of  spirituous  liquors  was  one  of  the 

is  Letter  to  E.  C.  Delavan,  January  4,  1836.  Printed  in  Journal  of 
the  American  Temperance  Union,  February,  1837,  p.  8. 


SAVING  SOCIETY  97 

most  important  factors  in  the  growth  of  the  criminal  and 
pauper  classes.20  The  Society  for  the  Prevention  of  Pauper¬ 
ism,  organized  in  New  York  in  1817,  called  attention  in  its 
first  annual  report  to  more  than  1600  licensed  groceries  in 
the  city  which  dispensed  liquor  in  small  quantities  to  anyone 
of  any  age.21  At  the  same  time  the  Massachusetts  Society 
for  the  Suppression  of  Intemperance  began  to  devote  its 
annual  reports  and  circulars  to  a  discussion  of  the  relation 
between  intemperance  and  pauperism.  Special  emphasis 
was  placed  upon  the  fact  that  the  majority  of  the  inmates  of 
poor-houses  and  work-houses  wrere  habitual  drunkards  and 
that  at  least  two-thirds  of  those  who  received  “outdoor 
relief”  were  addicted  to  the  use  of  ardent  spirits.  As  a 
remedy  the  society  suggested  that  all  public  spirited  citizens 
insist  upon  a  scrupulous  enforcement  of  the  laws  regulating 
the  issuance  of  licences  and  the  selection  of  retail  dealers. 
Lengthy  appeals  were  sent  to  employers,  containing  an  ex¬ 
position  of  the  effect  of  intemperance  on  business  prosperity 
and  an  estimate  of  the  sum  annually  wasted  on  intoxicants 
by  the  labouring  classes.22  Newspapers  carried  remon¬ 
strances  against  unlicensed  dram-shops,  tippling-houses  and 
corner  groceries,  which  were  fast  destroying  good  morals  and 
religion.  The  New  York  Society  for  the  Promotion  of 
Internal  Improvements  circulated  in  1819  Judge  Thomas 
Hertell’s  essay,  An  Expose  of  the  Causes  of  Intemperate 
Drinking,  which  advocated  total  abstinence  from  all  that 
intoxicates  as  the  true  basis  of  temperance.  Though 
Hertell’s  doctrine  of  total  abstinence  was  far  too  radical 
for  his  day,  he  admirably  stated  the  fears  of  those  who 

American  Daily  Advertiser,  May  10,  June  20,  March  21,  1817;  New 
England  Palladium,  January  31,  1817;  Albany  Gazette,  June  13,  1817. 
Cited  in  McMaster,  History  of  the  People  of  the  United  States,  IV, 
526-532. 

21  First  Annual  Report  of  the  Managers  of  the  Society  for  the  Pre¬ 
vention  of  Pauperism  in  New  York  (1818). 

22  Annual  Report  of  the  Massachusetts  Temperance  Society,  1818, 
1819,  1821. 


98  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

believed  that  no  society  so  deeply  attached  to  the  use  of 
spirituous  liquors  could  long  endure.  It  was  a  gloomy 
picture  he  painted  of  the  existing  demoralization  and  the 
inevitable  disaster  to  follow,  unless  intemperance  was  speedily 
checked  by  an  aroused  public  opinion.23 

Hertell  was  no  alarmist.  Neither  were  the  people  who, 
rejecting  his  prescription,  nevertheless  agreed  with  his 
diagnosis.  Indeed,  the  friends  of  temperance  were  guilty  of 
little  exaggeration  when  they  characterized  their  fellow- 
countrymen  as  a  race  of  hard  drinkers.  This  judgment 
was  substantiated  on  numerous  occasions  by  foreign  travel¬ 
lers,  always  quick  to  relate  anything  which  impressed  them  as 
a  peculiarity  of  the  New  World.  The  Frenchman,  Michaud, 
in  his  journeys  through  the  western  counties  of  Pennsylvania 
during  1802  and  1803,  noted  a  general  passion  for  ardent 
spirits  that  frequently  resulted  in  horrible  excesses,  since 
whisky,  rum  and  brandy  were  always  available.24  John 
Melish,  in  more  charitable  spirit,  attributed  the  generous  use 
of  strong  liquor  to  the  effect  of  the  hard  labour  required  in 
clearing  the  land  and  to  the  excessive  heat  of  the  summer 
months,  which  made  it  dangerous  to  drink  cold  water.  As 
there  could  be  no  cider  in  a  new  country,  he  reasoned,  and 
since  malt  liquors  would  not  keep,  ardent  spirits  were  the 
onty  practical  beverages  for  the  pioneer.  The  passing  years 
would  bring  a  more  temperate  use  of  milder  beverages.  His 
opinion  was  somewhat  altered,  however,  after  he  had  watched 
the  flatboats  on  the  Ohio  River,  laden  with  hundreds  of 
barrels  of  whisky,  cider,  peach  brandy  and  cherry  bounce. 
Any  general  reform  was  unlikely  so  long  as  the  drinking 
customs  of  the  people  were  intimately  associated  with  the 

23  Thomas  Hertell,  An  Expose  of  the  Causes  of  Intemperate  Drinking 
(1819). 

24  F.  A.  Michaud,  Travels  to  the  West  of  the  Allegheny  Mountains, 
II,  32,  40. 


SAVING  SOCIETY  99 

sources  of  their  economic  prosperity.25  Trade  considera¬ 
tions  were  important  in  all  parts  of  the  country.  In  1807 
the  English  traveller,  Charles  Janson,  was  astonished  that 
Boston  supported  only  two  breweries,  but  distilled  large 
quantities  of  rum  in  forty  establishments.  Everywhere  he 
went  in  New  England  the  distilleries  were  busy  supplying 
spirits  for  use  in  interstate  and  foreign  commerce.26  In 
1819  almost  every  town  of  one  thousand  population  in 
Connecticut  and  Rhode  Island  had  its  own  gin  or  rum 
distillery.  Hartford  County  was  proud  of  its  twenty-one 
plants,  which  furnished  a  market  for  the  farmers’  grain  and 
wood.  In  Rhode  Island,  Newport,  Providence  and  Bristol 
retained  their  old  supremacy,  having,  respectively,  eight, 
five  and  three  large  establishments.27  The  taverns,  gro¬ 
ceries,  chandlers’  shops  and  grog-shops,  retailing  at  two¬ 
pence  a  glass,  were  abundantly  supplied  with  a  cheap  grade 
of  ardent  spirits.28 

The  centre  of  production  was  rapidly  shifting  westward, 
however,  as  grain  and  fruit  replaced  molasses  in  the  industry. 
In  1810  it  was  estimated  that  14,191  distilleries  produced 
over  25,000,000  gallons  of  spirits,  ninety  per  cent  of  which 
was  distilled  from  fruit  and  grain.29  Ten  years  later  the 
fragmentary  reports  on  manufactures  in  the  returns  of  the 
fourth  census  indicated  that  New  York,  Pennsylvania,  Ohio 
and  Tennessee  had  more  capital  invested  and  employed  more 
men  in  the  production  of  ardent  spirits  than  any  other  states 
in  the  Union.  Especially  significant  were  the  comments  of 
the  officials,  who  forw’arded  the  census  returns,  to  the  effect 

25  John  Melish,  Travels  in  the  United  States  of  America,  II,  51-52, 
156-157. 

26  C.  W.  Janson,  The  Stranger  in  America,  pp.  28,  30,  299-300. 

2T  J.  C.  Pease  and  J.  M.  Niles,  A  Gazetteer  of  Connecticut  and  Rhode 
Island,  passim. 

28  H.  B.  Fearon,  A  Narrative  of  a  Journey,  pp.  28-29. 

29  Adam  Seybert,  Statistical  Annals,  pp.  463-464. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


100 

that  it  was  useless  to  consider  distilling  a  distinct  industry, 
since  it  was  carried  on  generally  throughout  the  rural 
districts.30  Such  a  situation  might  well  alarm  the  reformers 
in  view  of  the  fact  that  statistics  kept  by  the  Treasury  de¬ 
partment  between  1813  and  1817  listed  the  domestic  con¬ 
sumption  of  ardent  spirits  as  ninety  per  cent  of  the  total 
production. 

Serious  as  conditions  were,  temperance  organizations  were 
credited  with  no  outstanding  achievements.  A  vital  element 
seemed  to  be  lacking  in  the  reform  movement.  The  leaders 
were  inspired  with  the  benevolence  of  the  philanthropist 
rather  than  the  conviction  of  the  moralist.  Although  they 
were  not  unmindful  of  the  desirability  of  modifying  their 
own  conduct,  their  chief  concern  was  to  save  the  other  fellow 
from  disaster.  They  preferred  to  compromise  with  exist¬ 
ing  customs  rather  than  to  alienate  possible  support  by  too 
militant  an  attitude.  They  were  temperate  in  their  temper¬ 
ance.  Sincerely  believing  in  the  merits  of  their  cause,  they 
had  not  yet  accepted  it  as  the  paramount  concern  of  their 
lives.  As  a  result,  the  reform  failed  to  secure  fast  hold 
on  any  considerable  group  of  devotees.  Not  until  a  later 
day  did  the  reformers  fully  realize  that  it  requires  some¬ 
thing  of  the  spirit  of  the  zealot  to  arouse  mankind. 

3°  Gales  and  Seaton,  Digest  of  Manufactures,  Fourth  Census  of  the 
United  States. 


CHAPTER  VI 


THE  CHURCH  MILITANT 

“Ideas,”  says  Romain  Rolland,  “have  never  conquered  the 
world  as  ideas,  but  only  by  the  force  they  represent.  They 
do  not  grip  men  by  their  intellectual  contents,  but  by  the 
radiant  vitality  which  is  given  off  from  them  at  certain 
periods  in  history.  .  .  .  The  loftiest  and  most  sublime  idea 
remains  ineffective  until  the  day  when  it  becomes  contagious, 
not  by  its  own  merits,  but  by  the  merits  of  the  groups  of 
men  in  whom  it  becomes  incarnate.”  For  several  years 
groups  of  philanthropists  in  various  parts  of  the  country 
had  been  toying  with  the  idea  of  moderation  in  the  use  of 
liquor.  Its  intellectual  appeal  interested  them.  They  were 
anxious  to  test  its  value  as  a  corrective  of  certain  social 
evils,  but  they  were  not  deeply  concerned  about  the  success 
of  the  experiment.  They  were  far  from  feeling  that  zealous 
devotion  which  characterizes  the  true  reformer.  In  spite 
of  their  lack  of  enthusiasm,  however,  the  idea  of  temperance, 
which  they  sponsored,  was  gradually  entering  upon  its  period 
of  “radiant  vitality.”  It  was  being  appropriated  by  groups 
able  to  transfuse  into  it  the  power  which  grips  men.  It 
was  becoming  incarnate  in  the  organizations  of  evangelical 
Protestantism. 

Shortly  after  1815  the  evangelical  sects  in  the  United 
States  manifested  unusual  activity.  Religious  journals  were 
filled  with  accounts  of  the  renewed  interest  in  the  Scriptures, 
the  formation  of  Bible  study  groups,  and  the  organization  of 
prayer  societies  throughout  the  nation.  After  a  season  of 

101 


102  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

general  indifference  to  the  claims  of  revealed  religion,  the 
people  seemed  to  be  returning  to  their  former  faith.  Com¬ 
munities  from  Maine  to  Georgia  and  from  Kentucky  to 
Maryland  reported  enthusiastic  revival  meetings,  till  it  ap¬ 
peared  as  if  the  Great  Revival  of  1801  in  the  western  country 
was  to  be  reproduced  on  a  national  scale.  As  the  late  war 
had  freed  the  nation  from  the  political  complications  of 
European  diplomacy,  so  the  revival  movement  was  purging 
it  of  the  religious  heresies  born  of  the  French  Revolution. 
Some  regarded  the  numerous  outbursts  of  religiosity  as 
miraculous  dispensations,  others  found  in  them  only  the 
natural  result  of  the  era  of  reaction.  Now  that  the  coun¬ 
try’s  foreign  difficulties  were  settled,  attention  was  being 
focused  upon  domestic  problems,  and  religious  leaders  were 
undertaking  in  earnest  the  diffusion  of  the  word  of  God.1 
Whatever  the  cause  of  the  religious  emotionalism,  there  can 
be  no  doubt  that  the  country  was  profoundly  stirred. 
Secular  papers  reported  in  detail  the  progress  of  revival 
sentiment,  not  only  in  their  own  localities  but  also  in  distant 
parts,  while  religious  periodicals  had  little  for  their  readers 
but  the  glorious  news  of  the  “workings  of  the  hand  of 
God.”  2 

Popular  interest  in  the  revivals  was  a  powerful  incentive 
to  home  missionary  activity.  Communities  noted  for  their 
religious  fervour  were  eager  to  share  their  blessings  with 
less  fortunate  districts.  As  the  westward  migration  carried 
thousands  into  the  trans-Appalachian  region,  Methodist  and 
Baptist  circuit  riders  pressed  ever  forward  close  to  the 
fringe  of  settlement,  while  Congregational  and  Presbyterian 
clergymen  established  churches  wherever  congregations 

1  Connecticut  Courant,  January  16,  February  20,  1816. 

2  The  religious  intelligence  column  in  the  Courant,  for  example,  dates 
from  the  autumn  of  1815.  For  accounts  of  revivals  see:  Courant, 
February  20,  1816;  Connecticut  Journal,  files  for  February-May,  1819; 
Boston  Recorder,  March  25,  April  8,  22,  May  13,  1820,  June  9,  16, 
1821,  January  12,  1822;  Religious  Intelligencer,  files  for  1817-1818. 


THE  CHURCH  MILITANT  103 

could  be  gathered  together.  Often  these  home  missionaries 
maintained  a  close  connection  with  the  older  churches  of  the 
East,  and  their  reports  to  mission  boards  or  fellow  workers 
in  the  denomination  inspired  an  increased  devotion  to  the 
cause  of  evangelization.  The  most  active  workers,  whether 
preaching  in  the  frontier  communities  or  directing  the 
missionary  enterprise  from  eastern  cities,  were  not  slow  to 
realize  that  one  of  the  greatest  obstacles  in  their  way  was 
the  excessive  use  of  ardent  spirits.  James  B.  Finley,  a 
pioneer  among  Methodist  preachers  in  the  Ohio  valley, 
regarded  alcohol  as  the  most  powerful  enemy  he  had  to 
encounter.  Wherever  his  mission  took  him,  he  enforced 
upon  the  people  to  whom  he  ministered  the  Wesleyan  rule 
against  the  use  of  ardent  spirits  as  a  beverage.  He  en¬ 
countered  strong  opposition,  because  of  his  temperance 
principles,  but  an  invariable  accompaniment  of  his  camp- 
meetings  was  the  passing  of  intemperance  from  the  com¬ 
munity.  There  was  no  chance,  he  believed,  for  the  word  of 
God  to  take  root  among  people  who  drank  to  excess.3  His 
contemporary,  Peter  Cartwright,  an  outstanding  evangelist 
and  militant  preacher,  was  likewise  determined  that  his 
efforts  should  not  be  nullified  by  the  ravages  of  ardent  spirits. 
He  was  perfectly  willing  to  resort  to  physical  violence,  if 
necessary,  to  persuade  drunken  rowdies  that  they  were  not 
welcome  at  his  camp-meetings.  In  the  Kentucky  and 
Tennessee  Conferences,  before  he  was  transferred  to  Indiana, 
he  won  whole  congregations  to  the  temperance  standard  and 
held  backsliders  in  line  by  enforcing  a  rigorous  discipline.4 

Cartwright  and  Finley  were  representative  of  scores  of 
clergymen,  in  the  East  as  well  as  West,  who  were  associating 
temperance  work  with  their  pastoral  ministrations.  The 

s  Autobiography  of  James  B.  Finley,  W.  P.  Strickland,  editor,  pp. 
248-249,  299. 

*  Avtobiograpliy  of  Peter  Cartwright,  W.  P.  Strickland,  editor,  pp. 
182-185,  212-214. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


104 

western  evangelists,  probably  because  they  came  in  contact 
more  frequently  with  flagrant  excesses,  were  often  instru¬ 
mental  in  arousing  their  eastern  brethren  to  renewed  efforts. 
It  was  James  Axley  of  the  Tennessee  Conference,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  who  led  the  fight  for  more  stringent  rules  in  the  Meth¬ 
odist  Episcopal  Church.  With  the  support  of  his  western 
associates  Axley  finally  secured  favourable  action  from  the 
General  Conference  in  1816  on  his  resolution  that  any  local 
preacher  found  guilty  of  distilling  or  retailing  spirituous 
liquor  should  forfeit  his  licence.  Clergy  in  Congregational 
and  Presbyterian  churches  were  manifesting  greater  interest 
in  the  fortunes  of  the  moral  and  temperance  societies,  en¬ 
deavouring  to  supplant  apathy  with  enthusiasm,  to  provide 
a  definite  objective,  and  to  inspire  the  members  with  faith 
in  the  ultimate  success  of  the  cause.5 

Once  again  the  leadership  was  assumed  by  New  England. 
The  sermons  of  Timothy  Dwight  at  New  Haven  were  widely 
heralded  as  a  new  phase  of  the  movement,  since  the  President 
of  Yale  attacked  not  intemperance,  but  temperate  drinking. 
At  the  same  time  Calvin  Chapin,  pastor  at  Rocky  Hill  in 
the  Connecticut  valle}',  made  a  missionary  tour  of  the  West¬ 
ern  Reserve  in  1825  and  was  deeply  impressed  by  the  evi¬ 
dence  of  intemperance  which  he  found  in  the  western  country. 
His  views  of  the  situation  were  expanded  into  a  series  of 
articles,  the  first  of  which  appeared  in  the  Connecticut 
Observer  for  January,  1826.  Chapin  took  for  his  text, 
“Abstinence  from  ardent  spirits  is  the  only  certain  pre¬ 
ventive  of  intemperance.”  He  was  interested  in  proving  that 
total  abstinence  was  not  only  possible  but  also  desirable. 
Too  many  of  his  neighbours  and  parishioners,  he  thought, 
clung  to  the  belief  that  the  use  of  ardent  spirits  was  necessary 

5  Journals  of  the  General  Conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church,  I,  117,  168;  Religious  Intelligencer,  II,  383,  IV,  815;  Conn. 
Journal,  August  20,  1822. 


THE  CHURCH  MILITANT 


105 

for  the  preservation  of  health  and  that  abstinence  was  apt 
to  result  in  sudden  physical  decline.  In  refutation  Chapin 
cited  to  his  readers  the  fact  that  he  and  some  of  his  friends 
had  “abstained”  for  several  years  with  noticeable  benefit  to 
their  minds  and  bodies.  What  had  been  done  by  a  few 
could  be  done  by  others.  The  experiment  had  convinced  him 
that  the  friends  of  temperance  need  no  longer  compromise 
with  popular  misconceptions  in  regard  to  intoxicants. 
Nothing  less  than  total  abstinence  from  the  use  of  ardent 
spirits  could  henceforth  be  the  objective  of  the  reform.6 

While  Chapin’s  articles  were  arousing  both  favourable 
and  unfavourable  comment,  Lyman  Beecher  was  preparing 
for  publication  a  new  and  complete  statement  of  his  attitude 
toward  the  liquor  question.  He  had  witnessed  the  political 
revolution  of  1818  in  Connecticut,  which  had  overthrown  the 
established  order  without  dire  calamity  to  the  Common¬ 
wealth,  and  he  was  willing  to  separate  the  idea  of  reform  from 
that  of  party  alignment.  Besides,  he  had  been  active  in  the 
revivals  in  New  England  with  the  result  that  he  saw  more 
clearly  than  ever  the  dangerous  foe  confronting  religion  in 
the  guise  of  intemperance.7  With  all  the  power  of  his 
pulpit  oratory  he  renewed  his  denunciation  of  an  old  enemy. 
Six  sermons,  preached  before  the  Litchfield  congregation  in 
the  autumn  of  1825,  were  published  the  next  year  for  general 
circulation.  They  constituted  in  their  particular  sphere  as 
significant  a  piece  of  special  pleading  as  was  later  his 
daughter’s  famous  novel  in  support  of  abolition.  Reprinted 
during  the  next  decade  by  almost  every  temperance  or¬ 
ganization  of  consequence,  the  sermons  were  as  widely  read 
and  exerted  as  great  an  influence  as  any  other  contribution 

s  E.  P.  Parker,  An  Appreciation  of  Calvin  Chapin,  pp.  9-11;  Per¬ 
manent  Temperance  Documents,  Fourth  Report,  pp.  14—15;  The  His¬ 
tory  of  Ancient  Wethersfield,  Conn.,  H.  R.  Stiles,  editor,  I,  857. 

7  Beecher,  Autobiography ,  II,  34-35. 


106  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

to  the  literature  of  the  reform.8  From  his  pulpit  Dr. 
Beecher  sought  to  define  the  term  temperance,  so  loosely  and 
variously  used  in  all  discussions  of  the  liquor  question.  In 
his  mind  there  was  a  vital  distinction  between  intemperance 
and  intoxication.  “So  long  as  men  suppose,”  said  he,  “that 
there  is  neither  crime  nor  danger  in  drinking,  short  of  what 
they  denominate  drunkenness,  they  will  cast  off  fear  and 
move  onward  to  ruin  by  a  silent,  certain  course,  until 
destruction  comes  upon  them  and  they  cannot  escape.  .  .  . 
Let  it  therefore  be  engraven  upon  the  heart  of  every  man, 
that  the  daily  use  of  ardent  spirits,  in  any  form,  or  in  any 
degree,  is  intemperance.”  9  Having  thus  defined  his  posi¬ 
tion,  he  proceeded  to  analyse  the  causes  of  the  widespread 
use  of  intoxicants.  They  seemed  to  him  to  be  deeply  rooted 
in  the  social  customs  of  the  time,  and  he  believed  that  they 
could  not  be  removed  unless  every  community  was  filled  with 
a  sense  of  the  danger  involved  in  moderate  drinking.  In¬ 
temperance  he  regarded  as  a  disease,  beginning  in  the  germs 
of  temperate  drinking  and  becoming  finally  as  deadly  as  a 
plague.  The  only  practical  remedy  for  the  malady  was 
immediate  and  entire  abstinence.  For  the  idea  of  gradual 
emancipation  from  the  use  of  intoxicants  Beecher  had  the 
utmost  contempt.  “Wine  has  been  prescribed,”  he  admitted, 
“as  a  means  of  decoying  the  intemperate  from  the  ways  of 
death.  But  habit  cannot  be  thus  cheated  out  of  its  domain, 
nor  ravening  appetite  be  amused  down  to  a  sober  and  temper¬ 
ate  demand.  If  it  be  true  that  men  do  not  become  intemperate 
on  wine,  it  is  not  true  that  wine  will  restore  the  intemperate, 
or  stay  the  progress  of  the  disease.”  10  This  was  strong 

*  Mass.  Spy,  July  10,  1833;  Edwin  Emory,  History  of  Sanford, 
Maine,  p.  234;  Andrew  Young,  History  of  Warsaw,  N.  T.,  p.  150;  E. 
C.  Blackman,  op.  cit.,  p.  560;  Joseph  Cochran,  History  of  Mifflin  County, 
Pd I,  194—195;  Permanent  Temperance  Documents,  Fourth  Report, 
p.  16. 

9  Beecher,  Six  Sermons,  pp.  11,  39. 

10  Ibid.,  pp.  7,  64. 


THE  CHURCH  MILITANT  107 

doctrine,  but  it  indicated  how  far  the  new  movement  was 
reaching  beyond  the  grasp  of  the  old.  In  his  discussion  of 
practical  methods  Beecher  recommended  a  campaign  of 
education  to  correct  erroneous  opinions  with  regard  to  the 
medicinal  properties  of  ardent  spirits.  Next  in  point  of 
importance  was  the  formation  of  voluntary  associations 
pledged  to  total  abstinence  from  distilled  liquors.  He  also 
advised  that  an  effort  be  made  to  enlist  the  official  bodies  of 
all  denominations  of  Christians  in  a  general  condemnation 
of  the  liquor  traffic.  Filled  with  a  vision  of  the  high  calling 
of  his  country  in  international  affairs,  he  issued  solemn 
warning  that  intemperance  would  in  time  prevent  the 
realization  of  that  destiny.  He  spoke  with  conviction  when 
he  said: 

Intemperance  is  the  sin  of  our  land,  and  with  our  boundless 
prosperity  is  coming  in  upon  us  like  a  flood;  and  if  anything 
shall  defeat  the  hopes  of  the  world,  which  hang  upon  our  ex¬ 
periment  in  civil  liberty,  it  is  that  river  of  fire,  which  is  rolling 
through  the  land,  destroying  the  vital  air,  and  extending  around 
an  atmosphere  of  death.  ...  In  our  view,  and  in  our  practice  as 
a  nation,  there  is  something  fundamentally  wrong;  and  the 
remedy,  like  the  evil,  must  be  found  in  the  correct  application  of 
general  principles.  It  must  be  an  universal  and  national  remedy. 
What  then  is  this  remedy?  It  is  the  banishment  of  ardent 
spirits  from  the  list  of  lawful  articles  of  commerce,  by  a  cor¬ 
rect  and  efficient  public  sentiment;  such,  as  has  turned  slavery 
out  of  half  of  our  land,  and  will  yet  expel  it  from  the  world.11 

11  For  evidence  confirming  Beecher’s  opinion  of  the  prevalence  of 
intemperance  see  the  accounts  of  foreign  and  native  travellers.  Coke, 
A  Subaltern’s  Furlough,  I,  212;  I.  Finch,  Travels  in  the  United  States 
of  America  and  Canada,  p.  13;  B.  Hall,  Travels  in  North  America,  I, 
125-126;  I.  Holmes,  An  Account  of  the  United  States,  p.  352;  Adam 
Hodgson,  Letters  from  North  America,  II,  249-250;  Peter  Neilson, 
Recollection  of  a  Six  Years’  Residence  in  the  United  States,  pp.  67—69; 
Anne  Royall,  Sketches  of  History,  Life  and  Manners  in  the  United 
States,  pp  100,  158-159. 


108  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

The  first  response  to  Beecher’s  powerful  appeal  came  from 
Massachusetts,  where  several  of  his  associates  on  the  Ameri¬ 
can  Board  of  Commissioners  for  Foreign  Missions  decided 
that  the  time  had  come  for  definite  action.  One  of  their 
number,  Justin  Edwards,  pastor  of  the  Park  Street  Church, 
Boston,  wrote  to  his  friend,  William  A.  Hallock  of  New 
York: 

We  are  at  present  fast  hold  of  a  project  for  making  all  people 
in  this  country,  and  in  all  other  countries,  temperate;  or  rather, 
a  plan  to  induce  those  who  are  now  temperate  to  continue  so. 
Then,  as  all  who  are  intemperate  will  soon  be  dead,  the  earth 
will  be  eased  of  an  amazing  evil.  This  you  will  see  at  once,  is  a 
great  plan,  to  execute  it  thoroughly  will  require  great  wisdom 
and  strength.12 

For  some  time  Edwards  had  been  turning  the  project  over 
in  his  mind  and  discussing  it  with  influential  members  of  his 
congregation.  From  them  and  from  his  colleagues  in  the 
American  Tract  Society  he  had  received  enough  encourage¬ 
ment  to  warrant  the  calling  of  a  state  convention  to  consider 
ways  and  means  of  fighting  intemperance.  The  convention 
met  at  Boston  on  February  13,  1826,  and  enthusiastically 
adopted  a  constitution  for  the  American  Society  for  the 
Promotion  of  Temperance.  The  sixteen  signers  of  the 
document,  few  in  number  but  representing  powerful  forces 
in  the  state,  formed  the  temporary  membership  of  the  new 
group.  They  were,  Leonard  Woods,  William  Jenks,  Justin 
Edwards,  Warren  Fay,  Benjamin  Wisner,  Francis  Wayland 
and  Timothy  Merritt  of  the  clergy,  and  Marcus  Morton, 
Samuel  Hubbard,  George  Odiorne,  John  Tappan,  William 
Reed,  William  Ropes,  James  Chaplin,  Enoch  Hale  and  S.  V. 
S.  Wilder  of  the  laity.13  Five  of  their  number  were  active 

12  W.  A.  Hallock,  A  Sketch  of  the  Life  and  Labors  of  Justin  Ed¬ 
wards,  p.  195. 

13  Hallock,  op.  cit.,  pp.  196-197 ;  Permanent  Temperance  Documents, 
Fourth  Report,  pp.  11-12. 


THE  CHURCH  MILITANT  109 

in  the  work  of  the  Board  of  Commissioners  for  Foreign 
Missions,  and  the  new  society  was  modelled  closely  after 
that  organization.14  Though  the  initial  membership  was 
confined  to  citizens  of  Massachusetts,  additional  members 
were  to  be  selected  from  the  friends  of  temperance  in  all 
parts  of  the  nation  that  the  movement  might  become  national 
in  scope.  The  society’s  executive  committee  was  to  attempt 
to  co-ordinate  and  direct  the  activities  of  all  temperance 
workers.15  The  clergy  were  the  moving  force  in  the  early 
stages  of  organization,  Edwards,  Wayland,  Wisner  and 
Woods  being  especially  active. 

Leonard  Woods,  professor  of  theology  at  Andover  Semin¬ 
ary,  combined  an  intense  religious  zeal  wfith  a  large  capacity 
for  human  friendships.  The  charm  of  his  personality  trans¬ 
formed  his  admiring  pupils  into  his  devoted  followers  and 
gave  him  an  opportunity  to  commit  his  fellows  to  every  good 
cause.  It  was  in  the  class-room  at  Andover  that  he  met 
Justin  Edwards  and  recognized  in  the  young  student  of 
theology  the  qualities  of  a  leader.  Between  teacher  and 
pupil  there  developed  a  deep  friendship,  cherished  during 
later  years  as  the  two  men  found  mutual  interests  in  the 
Massachusetts  Bible  Society,  the  American  Tract  Society, 
the  foreign  missionary  enterprise  and  finally  the  temperance 
movement.  Edwards’  connections  in  Boston  enabled  him  to 
enlist  the  interest  of  two  of  his  colleagues  in  the  ministry. 
Francis  Wayland,  later  to  be  distinguished  as  the  great 
president  of  Brown  University,  was  pastor  of  the  First 
Baptist  Church,  while  Benjamin  Wisner  brought  to  the 
support  of  Edwards’  project  the  prestige  of  the  historic  Old 
South  Church.18 

n  Report  of  the  American  Board  of  Commissioners  for  Foreign  Mis¬ 
sions  (1825). 

15  P.  T.  D.,  Fourth  Report,  pp.  12-14. 

is  Hallock,  op.  cit.,  pp.  197-8. 


110  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

Although  the  clergy  were  the  efficient  element  in  the  new 
society,  they  entrusted  the  business  administration  to  the 
laymen.  The  executive  committee  of  seven  contained  only 
two  ministers,  Woods  and  Edwards.  The  members  chose 
Marcus  Morton  for  the  first  president.  He  was  a  politician 
with  interests  that  extended  far  beyond  the  range  of  his 
political  activity.  He  had  represented  his  district  in  Con¬ 
gress  for  three  terms,  had  served  for  one  year  on  the  state 
executive  council  and  in  1824  had  been  elected  lieutenant- 
governor.  At  the  time  the  American  Temperance  Society 
was  formed  he  was  an  associate  justice  of  the  Massachusetts 
Supreme  Court.17  Associated  with  Morton  on  the  executive 
committee  were  Samuel  Hubbard,  John  Tappan  and  S,  V.  S. 
Wilder.  Hubbard,  like  Morton,  was  a  lawyer  who  did  not 
allow  his  legal  practice  to  occupy  all  of  his  time.  He  had 
served  for  several  years  on  the  Board  of  Commissioners  for 
Foreign  Missions,  where  Tappan  and  Wilder  had  been  his 
colleagues,  and  through  their  influence  he  had  come  to  re¬ 
gard  intemperance  as  a  great  obstacle  to  the  progress  of 
home  and  foreign  missionary  enterprises.  Wilder’s  reputa¬ 
tion  as  a  friend  of  missions  was  international,  for  his  con¬ 
nection  with  large  mercantile  establishments  in  Boston  and 
New  York  necessitated  long  periods  of  residence  in  European 
countries.  He  was  one  of  the  directors  of  the  American 
Bible  Society  and  the  founder  of  the  Protestant  Bible  Society 
of  Paris.  To  the  temperance  cause  he  brought  the  same 
interest  and  enthusiasm  which  characterized  his  business 
and  missionary  activities.18  Tappan  had  been  a  charter 
member  of  the  Massachusetts  Society  for  the  Suppression  of 

17  Morton  was  elected  governor  of  Massachusetts  in  1839,  served  un¬ 
der  Polk  as  collector  of  the  port  of  Boston,  but  left  the  Democratic 
party  in  1848  because  of  his  anti-slavery  sentiments. 

1®  First  Ten  Annual  Reports  of  the  American  Board  of  Commissioners 
for  Foreign  Missions;  H.  O.  Dwight,  The  Centennial  History  of  the 
American  Bible  Society,  p.  58. 


THE  CHURCH  MILITANT 


111 

Intemperance  and  he  was  eager  to  see  the  work  extended 
throughout  the  country  by  an  organization  which  could 
formulate  and  enforce  uniform  methods  and  policies.19 
With  so  distinguished  and  earnest  a  leadership  the  American 
Temperance  Society  gave  promise  of  carrying  its  campaign 
far  beyond  the  limits  reached  by  any  previous  temperance 
group.  Success  was  foreshadowed  in  the  first  official  pro¬ 
nouncement  of  the  executive  committee  issued  on  March  12, 
1826.  The  statement  read: 

The  American  Society  for  the  Promotion  of  Temperance  has, 
after  devout  and  deliberate  attention  to  the  subject,  resolved  in 
the  strength  of  the  Lord,  and  with  a  view  to  the  account  which 
they  must  render  to  Him  for  the  influence  they  exert  in  the 
world,  to  make  a  vigorous,  united  and  persevering  effort,  to  pro¬ 
duce  a  change  of  public  sentiment  and  practice,  with  regard  to 
the  use  of  intoxicating  liquors.  For  this  purpose  they  deem  it 
of  primary  importance  that  they  should  obtain  an  adequate  fund 
for  the  support  of  a  man  of  suitable  qualifications,  in  the  office  of 
secretary,  who  shall  devote  himself  to  the  service  of  the  society, 
and  in  the  various  ways  pointed  out  in  the  constitution  labor  to 
promote  its  object.20 

One  detects  here  the  most  significant  characteristics  of  the 
temperance  reform  at  this  period  in  its  development.  In  the 
first  place,  its  supporters  were  under  a  divine  compulsion  to 
wage  a  ceaseless  war  against  intemperance ;  secondly,  they 
had  resolved  to  wage  this  war  by  sending  out  missionaries 
to  preach  a  new  gospel.  The  cardinal  point  in  the  new 
gospel  was  the  doctrine  of  total  abstinence  from  the  use  of 
ardent  spirits  as  a  beverage.  As  an  initial  step  in  the 
campaign,  Justin  Edwards  was  appointed  secretary  that 
he  might  devote  his  entire  time  to  furthering  the  society’s 
interests.  He  proceeded  to  justify  his  appointment  by 

19  Supra  p.  92. 

20  Clark,  op.  cit.,  p.  21. 


112  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

raising  $7500  during  the  autumn  of  1826  for  the  support 
of  another  agent.21  Nathaniel  Hewitt,  pastor  at  Fairfield, 
Connecticut,  was  selected  to  assist  Edwards,  and  the  two  men 
spent  almost  a  year  on  an  itinerary  that  took  them  through 
New  England  and  most  of  the  middle  Atlantic  states.  They 
had  for  their  reward  the  satisfaction  of  reporting  that  six 
state  and  two  hundred  and  sixteen  local  societies  had  become 
auxiliary  to  the  national  organization.  In  the  system  of 
creating  auxiliaries  to  the  central  society  they  copied  the 
plan  of  the  American  Bible  Society,  which  had  been  extremely 
successful  in  extending  its  work  to  all  sections  of  the  country. 
The  membership  of  every  auxiliary  was  required  to  sign 
the  pledge  of  total  abstinence.22 

The  phenomenal  success  of  Edwards  and  Hewitt  was  made 
possible  by  the  revival  of  old  societies,  which  had  been 
dragging  out  an  uneventful  existence  for  a  decade,  and  by 
the  response  of  religious  bodies  to  the  temperance  appeal. 
Everywhere  the  agents  worked  through  the  churches.  In 
1827  Hewitt  addressed  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Presby¬ 
terian  Church  at  its  meeting  in  Philadelphia  with  the  result 
that  resolutions  were  passed  instructing  the  various  presby¬ 
teries  to  co-operate  in  every  possible  way  with  the  American 
Temperance  Society.23  Likewise,  the  New  York  Synod  of 
the  Dutch  Reformed  Church  resolved  that  ministers  and 
congregations  be  urged  “to  abstain  entirely  from  the  use  of 
spirituous  liquors,  and  to  promote,  by  precept  and  example, 
the  cause  of  strict  temperance.”  24  In  1828,  the  Methodist 
General  Conference,  in  answer  to  petitions  from  many  of 
the  district  conferences,  advised  all  communicants  to  aban¬ 
don  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  ardent  spirits  and  to 

21  Hallock,  op.  cit.,  p.  228. 

22  Annual  Report  of  the  American  Temperance  Society  (1829). 

23  Marsh,  op.  cit.,  p.  39;  P.  T.  D.,  I,  242;  N.  7.  Obterver,  June  12, 
1830. 

2*  N.  Y.  Observer,  June  5,  1830. 


THE  CHURCH  MILITANT  113 

discontinue  the  practice  of  giving  liquor  to  employees.25 
During  the  next  five  years  other  Protestant  sects  fell  into 
line.  The  General  Associations  of  Congregational  churches 
in  Maine,  Massachusetts,  Connecticut  and  New  Hampshire 
went  so  far  as  to  brand  the  traffic  in  intoxicants  as  immoral 
and  inconsistent  with  a  profession  of  the  Christian  religion.26 
In  the  southern  states  Baptist  churches  were  often  the 
centres  from  which  temperance  sentiment  radiated,  but  the 
activity  of  the  denomination  was  not  confined  to  any  one 
section  of  the  country.27  Lutherans  and  Episcopalians 
were  accused  of  being  indifferent  to  the  reform,  and  they 
probably  were  not  so  enthusiastic  as  their  Methodist  and 
Baptist  friends,  but  advocates  within  their  ranks  could 
point  to  distinguished  individuals  and  numerous  congrega¬ 
tions  that  were  deeply  interested.  The  Southern  Churchman 
cited  Bishops  Otey  and  Mcllvaine  as  prominent  Episco¬ 
palians  who  had  espoused  the  temperance  cause.28 

As  the  leadership  and  membership  of  the  temperance 
societies  came  largely  from  the  churches,  so  the  appeal  of 
the  movement  was  apt  to  be  religious.  The  reform  took 
on  the  attributes  of  a  huge  revival.  Temperance  workers 
were  evangelists  preaching  a  new  gospel,  and  they  stated  its 
dogmas  in  the  pulpit  phraseology  of  the  day.  Persons 
w'ho  responded  to  the  powerful  appeal  and  signed  the  pledge 
were  known  as  “converts.”  For  the  programs  of  the  so¬ 
cieties  into  which  the  “converts”  were  gathered  the  evangeli¬ 
cal  prayer  meeting  served  as  a  model.  Appropriate  verses, 

25  Journals  of  the  General  Conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church,  I,  359,  384. 

20  Mass.  Spy,  June  1,  1831 ;  P.  T.  D.,  I,  241-244. 

27  Georgia  Journal,  June  5,  1830;  Boston  Christian  Herald,  Oct.  26, 
1831;  Western  Carolinian,  March  15,  1834.  Exception  should  be  made 
in  the  case  of  the  Primitive  Baptists  or  “Hard-shells,”  who  were  as 
opposed  to  temperance  propaganda  as  to  missionary  enterprise  in  their 
denomination.  See  J.  B.  Jeter,  A  Memoir  of  Abner  Clopton,  p.  175; 
Scomp,  King  Alcohol  in  the  Realm  of  King  Cotton,  p.  286. 

2*  Quoted  in  the  Pa.  Temperance  Recorder,  May,  1835,  p.  23. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


114 

set  to  familiar  gospel  tunes,  were  sung  with  all  the  fervour 
of  religious  exaltation.  The  emotional  appeals  of  the 
speakers  and  the  “testimony”  of  the  pledge-signers  strongly 
suggested  the  revivals  of  the  evangelical  sects.  Indeed,  the 
most  effective  propagandist  for  temperance  was  usually  the 
Protestant  clergyman  who  devoted  a  large  proportion  of 
his  sermons  to  denunciation  of  the  liquor  traffic,  indicting 
intemperance  as  the  great  barrier  in  the  way  of  the  church 
militant  as  it  marched  on  to  become  the  church  triumphant.29 

Unfortunately,  it  is  not  possible  in  complex  social  move¬ 
ments  to  isolate  single  factors  and  evaluate  their  relative 
importance.  If  such  an  analysis  could  be  made  of  the 
temperance  reform,  the  results  would  probably  reveal  the 
fact  that  the  greatest  force  possessed  by  the  reformers  was 
their  explanation  of  the  manner  in  which  the  use  of  ardent 
spirits  frustrated  the  accomplishment  of  the  church’s  mis¬ 
sion.  Since  the  church  of  Christ  had  been  established  on 
earth  for  the  purpose  of  saving  souls,  there  could  be  no 
doubt  that  its  purpose  was  thwarted  by  any  influence  which 
consigned  human  beings  to  perdition.  Therefore,  intem¬ 
perance,  plainly  marking  its  victim  as  unfit  for  salvation, 
was  the  hideous  enemy  of  organized  religion.  On  this  point 
the  Temperance  Manual  was  scarcely  in  accord  with  the 
Calvinistic  doctrine  of  election.  It  said: 

The  Holy  Spirit  will  not  visit,  much  less  will  He  dwell  with 
him  who  is  under  the  polluting,  debasing  effects  of  intoxicating 
drink.  The  state  of  mind  and  heart,  which  this  occasions,  is  to 
Him  loathsome,  and  an  utter  abomination.  Not  only  does  it 
darken  the  understanding,  sear  the  conscience,  pollute  the  affec¬ 
tions,  and  debase  all  the  powers  of  the  soul;  but  it  counteracts  the 
merciful  designs  of  Jehovah,  and  all  the  overflowing  kindness 
of  an  infinitely  compassionate  Saviour,  for  its  deliverance;  binds 
the  soul  in  hopeless  bondage  to  its  destroyer;  awakens  the  “worm 

29  Temperance  Recorder,  files  for  1832  and  1833. 


THE  CHURCH  MILITANT  115 

that  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  which  is  not  quenched,”  and  drives  the 
soul  away  in  despair,  weeping  and  wailing,  to  be  punished  with 
everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  and  the 
glory  of  His  power.30 

Having  fallen  victim  to  the  consummate  work  of  Satan  for 
human  destruction,  the  drunkard  was  beyond  the  reach 
of  God’s  saving  grace.  He  could  never  inherit  the  Kingdom 
of  Heaven.  Here,  then,  was  an  enemy  that  must  be 
destroyed,  else  the  church  would  never  be  successful  in  its 
effort  to  redeem  the  world.31 

Temperance  advocates  were  well  aware  of  the  value  of  an 
alliance  with  organized  religion.  In  season  and  out  they 
stressed  the  divine  origin  of  their  reform  and  the  religious 
character  of  their  propaganda.  Gerrit  Smith,  with  the 
same  enthusiasm  which  he  manifested  for  the  cause  of 
abolition,  characterized  the  temperance  reformation  as  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  regarded  it  as  the  preliminary 
to  a  general  acceptance  of  the  principles  of  Christianity. 
Well  had  it  been  named  the  John  the  Baptist  of  the 
Gospel!32  To  Lebbeus  Armstrong,  who  had  laboured  dili¬ 
gently  since  the  formation  of  the  first  society  at  Moreau, 
temperance  seemed  to  have  been  sent  by  Providence  for  the 
salvation. of  men.  It  had  been  foretold  by  the  prophets  of 
old  and  was  a  part  of  God’s  plan  for  blessing  the  world. 
From  the  beginning  the  movement  had  been  attended  by 
signal  manifestations  that  some  supernatural  agency  was 
controlling  it.  Every  sign  pointed  to  the  hand  of  God  work¬ 
ing  through  men  to  exterminate  the  use  of  ardent  spirits  and 
drive  the  curse  of  intemperance  from  its  strongholds.33 

30  Temperance  Manual  for  1836,  p.  9. 

31  L.  Armstrong,  An  Address  to  the  Temperance  Society  of  Malta, 
New  York  (1834);  Samuel  Spring,  The  Only  Safe  Expedient. 

33 American  Quarterly  Temperance  Magazine,  November,  1833,  p. 
356. 

33  Armstrong,  The  Temperance  Reformation,  pp.  24—25,  243, 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


116 

Since  the  cause  was  divinely  inspired,  the  duty  of  the  Chris¬ 
tian  church  was  plain.  In  every  communion  official  action 
should  brand  as  immoral  the  manufacture,  sale  and  use  of 
distilled  liquors ;  and  this  pronouncement  of  truth  should  be 
enforced  by  a  severe  discipline.34  Since  even  the  moderate 
use  of  ardent  spirits  was  but  the  beginning  of  intemperance, 
total  abstinence  must  be  required  from  the  church  member 
that  he  might  not,  by  falling  into  the  plight  of  the 
drunkard,  shut  himself  off  from  the  power  of  the  church  to 
save.35 

In  the  campaign  to  commit  Protestant  sects  to  these 
propositions  the  chief  attacks  were  directed  against  church 
members  who  received  their  livelihood  from  the  liquor  traffic. 
The  executive  committee  of  the  American  Temperance  So¬ 
ciety  emphasized  in  its  official  circulars  the  immoral  charac¬ 
ter  of  the  trade,  the  evident  conflict  with  Christian  principles 
and  the  moral  responsibility  for  the  crimes  which  drink 
occasioned.  The  committee  knew  of  no  principle  of  the 
Gospel  that  would  justify  Christian  churches  permitting 
their  members  to  continue  in  a  business  which  filled  the  poor- 
houses  and  fostered  every  manner  of  crime.  From  all  parts 
of  the  country  reports  indicated  that  the  greatest  obstacle 
in  the  way  of  temperance  reform,  the  success  of  the  Gospel, 
and  the  salvation  of  men  was  the  example  of  church  members 
who  still  sold  ardent  spirits.  If  the  church  continued  to  con¬ 
nive  at  their  offence  by  refusing  to  discipline  them,  it  would 
be  forced  to  assume  full  responsibility  for  the  evils  of  in¬ 
temperance.  There  could  be  no  evasion.  A  sect  which 
compromised  with  sin  must  bear  the  guilt  of  the  sin  which  it 
condoned.36  So  the  issue  after  all  was  Cain’s  immortal 
question,  “Am  I  my  brother’s  keeper?”  No  church  dared 
answer  that  question  by  insisting  that  so  long  as  its  members 

34  Ibid.,  pp.  56—57;  Am.  Quart.  Temp.  Mag.,  November,  1833,  pp.  343- 
347. 

35  Journal  of  Humanity,  March  10,  1831. 

136  j5.  x.  D.,  Fifth  Report,  pp,  153-154. 


THE  CHURCH  MILITANT  H7 

remained  sober  and  honourable,  it  mattered  not  how  they 
earned  their  living.  Each  congregation  was  accountable 
not  only  for  its  own  conduct,  but  also  for  the  influence  of  its 
conduct  upon  others.  If  it  offered  fellowship  to  those  who 
used,  produced  and  distributed  ardent  spirits,  it  was  directly 
concerned  with  the  pauperism,  disease  and  crime  which  were 
inevitable  results.  How  could  any  sect  speak  of  a  Christian 
dram-shop?  Such  an  idea  was  doubtless  a  choice  gem  in 
the  phrase-book  of  Satan.  The  church  did  not  deny  that 
the  dram-shop  was  the  recruiting  rendezvous  of  Hell.  How, 
then,  could  a  Christian  be  the  recruiting  officer?37 

Such  was  the  burden  of  the  exhortations  addressed  to  the 
various  church  bodies  in  an  attempt  to  enlist  organized 
religion  in  the  campaign  against  intemperance.  It  was  a 
challenge  to  all  denominations  of  Christians  to  brand  the 
liquor  traffic  as  a  business  irreconcilable  with  the  standards 
of  Christian  morality.  Among  the  Methodists  Wilbur  Fisk, 
principal  of  Wesleyan  Academy  in  Massachusetts,  believed 
that  the  interests  of  his  church  would  best  be  served,  if  he 
could  persuade  it  to  purge  its  membership  of  all  who  refused 
to  renounce  the  use  of  ardent  spirits.  Some  Methodist 
conferences  were  persuaded  to  restore  Wesley’s  original  rule 
on  the  subject  and  regulate  their  discipline  accordingly.38 
Dr.  Fisk  was  responsible  for  the  conversion  of  Dr.  Nathan 
Bangs,  editor  of  the  Christian  Advocate,  who  immediately 
devoted  the  columns  of  that  Presbyterian  periodical  to  the 
work  of  reform.  The  agents  of  the  American  Temperance 
Society,  travelling  through  all  parts  of  the  country,  never 
failed  to  stress  the  Christian’s  duty  to  enlist  in  the  warfare 
against  a  system  which  flouted  every  religious  and  moral 
principle.  The  publicity  department  of  tbe  national  or- 

37  G.  Prentice,  Wilbur  Fisk,  p.  190. 

38  Prentice,  op.  cit.,  pp.  184-192;  Journal  of  the  Indiana  Annual  Corir- 
ferences  of  the  Methodist  Church  in  W.  W.  Sweet,  Circuit-Rider  Days 
in  Indiana,  pp.  147,  197-198,  325. 


118  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

ganization  kept  constantly  before  church  members  the  effect 
of  intemperance  upon  the  progress  of  organized  religion.39 
Statistics  were  compiled  to  prove  the  point.  A  tabulation 
of  the  records  kept  by  Congregational  and  Presbyterian 
churches  in  New  England,  New  York,  Pennsylvania  and 
Ohio  showed  that  during  the  half-century  following  1780 
over  fifty  per  cent  of  the  disciplinary  troubles,  resulting  in 
excommunication,  were  caused  by  drunkenness.40 

This  propaganda  was  not  wasted  upon  the  churches,  for 
in  many  localities  the  arguments  of  the  temperance  lead¬ 
ers  were  productive  of  definite  action.  Some  congregations 
made  total  abstinence  from  the  use  of  ardent  spirits  a  nec¬ 
essary  qualification  for  membership.  Methodist  and  Bap¬ 
tist  conferences,  Presbyterian  and  Reformed  synods  passed 
resolutions,  commending  the  temperance  reformation,  en¬ 
couraging  ministers  to  support  the  movement  and  exhort¬ 
ing  church  members  to  abstain  from  all  connection  with 
the  liquor  traffic.41  Camp  meetings  in  the  South  and  West 
were  turned  into  seasons  of  pledge-signing,  and  converted 
drunkards  were  admitted  into  Christian  fellowship  as  evi¬ 
dence  of  the  power  of  temperance  principles  to  save  souls.42 
From  every  section  came  reports  of  the  increased  activity 
of  the  clergy,  who  were  beginning  to  realize  that  their 
efforts  to  spread  the  Gospel  were  nullified  by  the  intemperate 
habits  of  the  people  among  whom  they  laboured.  In  1835 
there  were  more  than  3000  ministers  on  the  records  of  the 

39  P.  T.  D.,  Fifth  Report,  pp.  129-131;  Journal  of  Humanity,  Novem¬ 
ber  4,  1830. 

«I.  R.  Barbour,  A  Statistical  Table  showing  the  influence  of  in¬ 
temperance  upon  the  church.  The  records  of  ninety-four  congregations 
revealed  469  excommunications  between  1810  and  1830  of  which  256 
were  caused  by  intemperance. 

*i  Journal  of  Humanity,  Nov.  18,  1830;  N.  Y.  Observer,  Dec.  4,  1830; 
Am.  Quart.  Temp.  Mag.,  May,  1833;  T.  S.  Griffiths,  A  History  of  Bap¬ 
tists  in  New  Jersey,  pp.  510-511. 

*2  Christian  Advocate,  Oct.  31-  1828;  P.  T.  D.,  I,  86-87. 


THE  CHURCH  MILITANT 


119 

national  society  as  signers  of  the  abstinence  pledge.43  To 
the  enthusiasts  in  the  reform  this  co-operation  of  the  reli¬ 
gious  organizations  meant  not  only  the  triumph  of  tem¬ 
perance  principles,  but  also  the  dawn  of  the  millennium 
for  the  church.  The  editor  of  the  Temperance  Recorder 
phrased  the  general  rejoicing  in  these  words: 

Ages  have  gone  by  since  the  fact  was  revealed  in  the  predic¬ 
tions  of  inspired  men,  that  there  shall  ere  long  dawn  upon  the 
church,  while  her  residence  is  yet  on  earth,  a  day  of  triumph  and 
jubilee — a  period  in  'which  her  light  and  glory  shall  fill  the 
world.  .  .  .  Who  that  looks  abroad  upon  the  world  and  surveys 
the  moral  machinery  that  is  now  in  operation,  can  doubt  that  we 
are  fairly  brought  to  this  cheering  and  triumphant  conclusion? 
And  who  that  looks  at  the  progress  and  present  state  of  the 
temperance  cause — at  the  strength  which  it  has  gained  in  this 
nation,  and  at  the  increasing  rapidity  and  majesty  with  which  it 
moves  forward — who  can  let  his  eye  rest  upon  all  this,  without 
being  full  in  the  conviction  that  this  very  cause  is  at  once  the 
harbinger  of  the  millennium  and  destined  to  be  one  of  the  most 
efficient  means  of  its  introduction.44 

But  this  glowing  tribute  did  not  represent  the  sentiment 
of  all  the  religious  forces  of  the  country.  Protestant  sects 
were  far  from  unanimous  in  their  estimate  of  the  temperance 
movement.  Some  congregations,  like  that  of  the  Dutch 
Reformed  church  at  Breakabeen,  New  York,  openly  de¬ 
nounced  the  reform  and  forbade  their  members  to  participate 
in  it.45  Certain  Primitive  Baptist  churches  in  Tennessee 
actually  excommunicated  members  who  were  guilty  of  joining 
a  temperance  society.48  Complaints  were  numerous  that 
in  Georgia  faithful  workers  were  hindered  by  the  hostility 

43  Pa.  Temp.  Pec.,  May,  1836,  p.  40. 

44  Temp.  Bee.,  March  6,  1832. 

**Ibid...  June  5,  1835. 

4«  N.  Y.  Evangelist,  June  14,  1834;  Journal  of  the  American  Temper¬ 
ance  Union,  May,  1837. 


120  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

of  ministers  who  not  only  set  a  poor  example  by  their  per¬ 
sonal  conduct,  but  also  ridiculed  temperance  principles  from 
their  pulpits.  In  Virginia  and  the  Carolinas  Abner  Clop- 
ton  found  that  his  most  difficult  problem  was  to  enlist 
the  support  of  the  more  conservative  Baptist  clergymen.4' 
Sectarianism  was  another  shibboleth  of  church  members  who 
were  unwilling  to  sign  the  pledge.  They  charged  the  re¬ 
form  with  being  a  cloak  for  the  activity  of  certain  sects 
which  were  busily  engaged  in  gathering  the  membership  of 
temperance  societies  into  their  own  ranks.  Some  colour  was 
given  to  this  charge  by  the  preponderance  of  Methodist  in¬ 
fluence  in  certain  communities,  but  the  reformers  indignantly 
denied  that  they  had  any  interest  in  denominational  rivalries. 
They  pointed  to  the  fact  that  representatives  of  every 
sect  were  found  among  the  friends  of  temperance  as  proof 
that  no  particular  group  occupied  a  preferred  position. 
None  were  excluded,  and  none  were  discriminated  against. 
The  man  who  professed  no  religious  belief  was  as  important 
a  recruit  as  the  most  devout  Christian.  Catholic  and 
Protestant  were  equally  welcome  as  leaders  or  workers  in  the 
ranks.48 

But  in  the  minds  of  some  Christians  sectarianism  was  not 
the  most  serious  accusation  that  could  be  brought  against 
the  zealous  reformers.  The  entire  philosophy  of  the  term 
perance  movement  was  founded  upon  a  heresy,  namely,  that 
secular  organizations  could  accomplish  results  which  could 
not  be  achieved  through  the  agency  of  the  church.  This 
view  was  ably  expressed  by  Bishop  John  H.  Hopkins  of 
Vermont  in  his  book  on  The  Primitive  Church.  Because  of 
his  interest  in  the  aesthetic  and  mystical  aspects  of  religion, 
Bishop  Hopkins  had  given  up  a  profitable  manufacturing 

Georgia  Journal,  June  5,  1830;  Jeter,  Memoir  of  Abner  Clopton, 
p.  175. 

Journal  of  Humanity,  Nov.  4,  1830;  N.  Y.  Evangelist,  April  14, 
1832. 


THE  CHURCH  MILITANT 


121 

business  in  Pittsburgh  in  order  to  enter  the  priesthood  of 
the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church.  A  musician,  artist  and 
architect  of  considerable  ability,  he  found  in  his  church  a 
means  of  satisfying  his  love  of  beauty.  In  the  dogmas  and 
methods  of  evangelical  Protestantism  he  saw  nothing  to 
admire,  for  the  emphasis  seemed  to  be  placed  upon  the  good 
rather  than  the  beautiful.  Perhaps,  it  was  this  fact  that 
first  aroused  his  hostility  to  the  temperance  movement, 
which  was  so  definitely  evangelical  in  its  methods.  At  any 
rate,  he  attacked  it  with  as  much  zest  as  he  criticized 
abolitionism.  To  him  there  was  nothing  mystical  about  the 
reform.  It  was  not  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  a  clear 
case  of  men  ascribing  to  secular  organizations  the  ability  to 
change  social  customs  so  completely  as  to  produce  a  spiritual 
regeneration.  It  was  an  attempt  to  set  aside  religious 
influences  as  worthless  and  substitute  for  them  man-made 
societies  which  sought  to  hallow  their  work  by  the  claim  that 
they  were  divinely  sanctioned.  It  was  a  monstrous  negation 
of  the  fundamental  principle  of  Christianity  that  the  church 
of  Christ  alone  can  save  men’s  souls.49 

The  people  who  took  Bishop  Hopkins’  work  seriously  were 
interested  to  read  in  1836  an  anonymous  publication  called 
Protestant  Jesuitism.  They  would  have  been  more  inter¬ 
ested  had  they  known  that  its  author  was  at  the  time  a 
travelling  correspondent  for  the  New  York  Observer,  a 
religious  weekly  constantly  friendly  to  the  temperance  re¬ 
form.  For  the  author  of  Protestant  Jesuitism  was  Calvin 
Colton,  later  famous  as  the  biographer  of  Henry  Clay  and 
the  editor  of  the  Whig  statesman’s  public  and  private  papers. 
Colton  had  graduated  from  Yale  College  and  Andover 
Theological  Seminary,  had  served  as  a  home  missionary  for 
three  years  in  New  York  state  and  had  then  accepted  a  call 
from  the  Presbyterian  church  at  LeRoy,  New  York.  When 

49  Hopkins,  The  Primitive  Church;  The  Life  of  John  Henry  Hop¬ 
kins,  By  One  of  His  Sons,  pp.  169-170, 


122  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

he  was  forced  to  resign  from  the  ministry,  because  of  a 
failing  voice,  he  turned  to  journalism  and  became  a  success¬ 
ful  writer  of  special  articles  on  religious  subjects.  For  the 
Observer  he  travelled  widely,  spending  several  years  in 
Europe.  It  was  during  this  time  that  he  abandoned  his 
Calvinistic  theology  and  decided  to  take  orders  in  the 
Protestant  Episcopal  Church.  He  seems  to  have  been 
temperamentally  prejudiced  against  all  reformers,  for  his 
hostility  toward  the  temperance  workers  was  only  exceeded 
by  his  hatred  of  the  abolitionists.50  Through  many  of  his 
writings  runs  a  strain  of  protest  against  the  attempts  of 
non-political  organizations  to  secure  political  power  for  the 
purpose  of  effecting  moral  or  religious  reforms.  This  was 
the  basis  of  his  attack  on  the  anti-slavery  societies,  as  it  was 
the  theme  of  his  denunciation  of  the  temperance  conspiracy. 

Colton  placed  the  mark  of  his  approval  upon  an  idea 
which  had  caused  the  reformers  much  trouble.  He  charged 
that  a  group  of  determined  people,  representing  various 
Protestant  sects,  had  inaugurated  a  campaign  to  dominate 
public  opinion  through  a  well-organized  minority.  Pre¬ 
tending  that  they  were  eager  to  advance  the  cause  of  Chris¬ 
tianity,  they  were  really  planning  to  usurp  for  themselves 
the  influence  of  the  Christian  church.  Under  the  guise  of 
moral  reform  they  were  carrying  out  their  sinister  purpose 
to  destroy  the  liberties  of  the  American  people.51  Their 
methods  betrayed  them.  By  an  inquisitorial  system,  which 
left  the  individual  neither  the  keeping  of  his  own  conscience 
nor  the  use  of  his  own  judgment,  they  compelled  the  accept¬ 
ance  of  their  doctrines.  The  manner  of  obtaining  signatures 

60  Colton,  Abolition,  A  Sedition,  passim;  Colton  severed  his  connection 
with  the  Observer  shortly  after  he  published  Protestant  Jesuitism. 

si  Some  claimed  to  see  in  the  temperance  organizations  an  attempt  to 
unite  church  and  state  by  using  the  force  of  organized  religion  to  com¬ 
pel  the  state  to  take  action  against  the  liquor  traffic.  Journal  of  Hu¬ 
manity,  October  14,  1829,  p.  83;  Reasons  for  not  joining  the  Temperance 
Society,  By  a  Clergyman  (1836);  E.  C.  Blackman,  op.  cit.,  p.  565. 


THE  CHURCH  MILITANT  123 

to  the  pledge  was  particularly  artful  and  cunning,  for  signers 
were  cleverly  led  to  the  altar  and  there  compelled  to  humble 
themselves  before  the  public.  The  principle  of  the  move¬ 
ment  was  coercion  not  reform.  The  individual  was  pros¬ 
trated  by  the  force  of  an  overpowering  bigotry  and  became 
an  unwilling  servant  of  zealots  whom  he  really  despised.52 

Though  the  temperance  forces  might  smile  at  such  a 
description  of  their  methods  and  purposes,  they  realized  that 
many  were  only  too  ready  to  believe  Colton’s  accusations.53 
Church  members  explained  their  refusal  to  abstain  from 
the  use  of  ardent  spirits  by  professing  to  see  the  sinister 
design  of  the  temperance  movement.  Christians  continued 
to  engage  in  the  liquor  traffic,  maintaining  that  the  campaign 
against  their  business  was  an  unholy  effort  of  a  fanatical 
minority  to  deprive  them  of  their  liberty  and  property. 
These  charges,  a  curious  compound  of  sincerity  and  hy¬ 
pocrisy,  constituted  a  counter-offensive  which  the  reformers 
could  not  ignore.  They  met  it  usually  by  vigorously  re¬ 
affirming  their  belief  in  the  divine  origin  of  their  cause  and  its 
prophecy  of  the  millennium.  Chancellor  Walworth  of  New 
York  well  voiced  their  faith : 

As  you  value  the  souls  of  your  fellow-men,  and  the  dying  love 
of  Him  who  came  to  seek  and  to  save,  and  who  went  about  doing 
good,  let  me  entreat  you  to  persevere  in  this  benevolent  and  glori¬ 
ous  work,  until  “total  abstinence”  shall  be  inscribed  upon  the  ban¬ 
ner  of  every  state  and  nation  of  this  world.  Then,  and  not  till 
then,  shall  the  peaceful  reign  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah 
commence  and  be  extended  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.54 

The  temperance  idea  had  indeed  become  incarnate  in  its 
faithful  supporters. 

52  Colton,  Protestant  Jesuitism,  pp.  50-92. 

53  In  1842  A.  S.  Davis  of  Hanover,  Pa.,  issued  A  Loud  Call  to  the 
Citizens  of  the  Nation  in  which  he  revived  the  charge  that  the  tem¬ 
perance  societies  were  attempting  to  unite  church  and  state. 

5 *Mass.  Spy,  Aug.  24,  1836. 


CHAPTER  VII 


ORGANIZING  FOR  VICTORY 

The  temperance  reformers  were  propagandists  who  neither 
feared  nor  denied  the  designation.  They  willingly  admitted 
that  they  were  in  the  business  of  creating  a  public  opinion 
which  in  time  would  substitute  a  better  standard  of  conduct 
for  the  existing  one.  Two  pictures  were  constantly  in  their 
minds,  one  of  a  nation  doomed  to  destruction  because  of  the 
ravages  of  strong  drink,  the  other  of  a  nation  happy  and 
prosperous  under  a  regimen  of  temperance.  To  translate 
into  terms  of  everyday  life  the  promise  of  the  latter  picture 
was  their  objective;  success  depended  upon  their  ability  to 
make  others  see  the  situation  as  it  appeared  to  them.  They 
must,  therefore,  unite  in  permanent  organizations  all  those 
who  considered  abstinence  from  the  use  of  ardent  spirits 
of  primary  importance  in  the  control  of  human  relations. 
This  would  give  them  an  effective  means  of  voicing  opinions 
favourable  to  their  purposes. 

The  problem  of  persuading  the  unconvinced  was  handled 
with  an  evident  understanding  of  human  nature.  The  mind 
of  man,  reasoned  the  reformers,  is  so  constituted  that  it 
may  be  more  effectually  reached  by  forbearance  and  mild 
suggestion  than  by  severity.  This  is  particularly  true  when 
the  purpose  is  to  induce  men  to  change  their  usual  course 
of  conduct  and  to  adopt  new  principles  of  action.  Many 
people  have  a  pronounced  pride  of  opinion,  an  unwillingness 
to  lay  aside  long  cherished  sentiments  and  an  aversion  from 
•breaking  firmly  fixed  habits,  which  cannot  be  overcome  by 

frontal  attacks.  They  must  be  convinced  of  the  advisability 

124 


125 


ORGANIZING  FOR  VICTORY 

of  the  suggested  change  by  arguments  which  recognize  some 
merit  in  the  former  practice,  but  urge  its  abandonment  for 
the  sake  of  something  better.  Accordingly,  during  the  first 
years  of  the  American  Temperance  Society’s  work,  propa¬ 
ganda  was  couched  more  often  in  terms  of  mild  criticism 
than  in  those  of  bitter  invective.1 

The  philosophy  underlying  the  reform  was  essentially  of 
the  eighteenth  century,  for  its  central  idea  was  the  perfect¬ 
ibility  of  man.  The  infinite  capacity  of  mankind  for  self- 
improvement,  said  the  temperance  leaders,  made  it  possible  to 
correct  conduct  and  to  elevate  moral  standards  by  means 
of  intellectual  appeals.  In  fact,  error  was  virtually  harm¬ 
less,  as  Jefferson  had  said,  if  reason  was  free  to  combat  it. 
Since  men  were  rational  creatures,  it  would  not  be  difficult 
to  persuade  them  that  self-control  was  desirable  and  that  it 
could  best  be  insured  by  abstinence  from  anything  that 
tended  to  encourage  excess.  Such  persuasion  would  require 
a  widespread  diffusion  of  knowledge  through  an  energetic 
educational  campaign.  The  duty  of  the  temperance  so¬ 
cieties,  therefore,  was  to  direct  the  thoughts  of  intelligent 
people  in  such  fashion  that  they  would  understand  the 
effects  of  intemperance  and  the  practicability  of  abstinence 
as  a  remedy.  The  principal  instruments  through  which 
this  could  be  accomplished  were  voluntary  associations  of 
abstainers,  constant  admonitions  from  Christian  pulpits  and 
informing  appeals  in  the  religious  and  secular  press.2  That 
the  result  of  a  concerted  campaign  would  be  the  gradual 
discrediting  of  existing  ideas  with  regard  to  the  use  of 
intoxicants,  the  reformers  never  doubted.  They  were  con¬ 
fident  that,  since  sin  was  due  to  ignorance,  knowledge  would 
turn  men  from  vice  to  virtue. 

Indeed,  the  decade  following  the  formation  of  the  American 

1  Temperance  Recorder,  April  3,  1832,  pp.  9-10;  Journal  of  Humanity, 
November  18,  1830,  p.  101. 

2  Journal  of  Humanity,  January  24,  1829,  p.  17;  Pa.  Temperance  Re¬ 
corder,  March,  1835. 


126  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

Temperance  Society  in  1826  was.  a  period  of  optimism. 
High  hopes  were  entertained  that  the  temperance  idea  would 
become  so  popular  that  it  would  effect  a  revolution  in  man¬ 
ners  and  morals.  Favourable  sentiment  was  evident  in  all 
parts  of  the  country,  sometimes  a  direct  result  of  the  work 
of  the  national  society  and  its  auxiliaries,  but  more  often  an 
independent  manifestation  of  the  opinion  of  a  particular 
community.  Writers  in  temperance  periodicals  were  prone 
to  regard  this  popular  concern  over  intemperance  as  a  re¬ 
sult  of  the  principle  and  practice  of  self-government.  Rulers 
by  divine-right  and  hereditary  nobles  might  tolerate  with 
impunity  depraving  indulgences  which  kept  the  great  mass 
abject,  but  when  the  many  came  into  political  power  a  more 
rigorous  social  control  was  necessary  for  the  success  of 
republican  institutions.3  Though  this  explanation  may  have 
been  more  ingenious  than  valid,  the  fact  remained  that  the 
poorer  classes  in  the  community  were  manifesting  an  un¬ 
wonted  interest  in  social  problems,  an  interest  which  the 
temperance  forces  were  quick  to  convert  into  organized  effort 
for  reform. 

In  an  attempt  to  establish  uniform  procedure  throughout 
the  country  the  national  society  suggested  that  all  local 
groups,  regardless  of  their  origin,  adopt  the  same  pledge  and 
become  auxiliary  to  their  state  society.  For  a  model  pledge 
it  recommended : 

We,  the  subscribers,  residing  in  the  state  of . , 

county  of . ,  town  of . ,  believing  that 

the  drinking  of  ardent  spirits  is,  for  persons  in  health,  not  only 
unnecessary  but  injurious;  that  its  use  is  the  cause  of  forming 
intemperate  appetites  and  habits;  and  while  it  is  continued,  the 
evils  of  intemperance  can  never  be  prevented:  do  therefore  agree, 
that  we  will  not,  except  as  a  medicine  in  case  of  bodily  in- 

3  Am.  Quart.  Temp.  Mag.,  February,  1833,  p.  28;  November,  1833,  p. 
326.  See  also  Lyman  Cobb,  Juvenile  Reader,  No.  3.  p.  187,  published 
at  Chambersburg,  Pa.,  in  1836. 


ORGANIZING  FOR  VICTORY  127 

firmity,  use  distilled  spirits  ourselves,  or  procure  them  for  use 
of  our  families,  or  provide  them  for  the  entertainment  of  our 
friends,  or  for  persons  in  our  employment,  and  that  in  all  suitable 
ways  we  will  discountenance  the  use  of  them  in  the  community.4 

This  pledge  was  not  generally  used  by  the  societies,  for 
many  never  became  auxiliary  to  the  national  organization, 
and  of  those  that  did  a  majority  preferred  to  work  out  their 
own  ideas  of  a  proper  obligation.  As  the  number  of  societies 
increased,  central  control  became  less  practicable,  and  each 
state  was  advised  to  take  care  of  its  own  work.  In  some 
sections  the  state  organization  was  an  efficient  force ;  in 
others  it  was  merely  an  annual  convention  of  delegates  from 
county  and  local  societies.  New  York,  Massachusetts  and 
Connecticut  possessed  strong  central  societies  which  domi¬ 
nated  activities  in  the  entire  state,  but  there  were  many  local 
groups  even  in  these  districts  that  did  not  recognize  any 
outside  control.  In  the  South  and  West  there  was  little 
indication  of  a  federation  of  the  temperance  forces,  the  re¬ 
sult  being  that  much  power  was  lost  through  the  failure  to 
co-ordinate  efforts.  This  lack  of  organization  on  a  large- 
scale  meant  also  that  records  of  the  movement  were  kept 
either  poorly  or  not  at  all.  Where  the  state  society  wielded 
an  effective  control,  the  auxiliaries  sent  in  annual  reports, 
but  elsewhere  achievements  went  unheralded,  unless  some 
enterprising  member  sent  news  items  to  the  temperance 
periodicals.  The  paucity  of  statistics  and  the  enthusiasm  of 
devoted  statisticians  caused  many  compilations  to  represent 
an  earnest  hope  rather  than  an  accurate  enumeration.5 

Although  a  minority  of  the  temperance  forces  were  affili¬ 
ated  with  the  American  Temperance  Society,  that  organiza¬ 
tion  served  as  a  clearing-house  for  the  friends  of  the  reform. 
Its  annual  reports  attempted  to  present  a  survey  of  con- 

*  Temperance  Recorder,  May  1,  1832,  p.  17. 

s  P.  T.  D.,  I,  161,  342. 


128  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

ditions  throughout  the  United  States.  In  1829  approxi¬ 
mately  1000  societies  were  listed  with  a  membership  of  more 
than  100,000.  Two  years  later  the  movement  had  doubled 
in  strength,  for  the  records  showed  2200  distinct  groups 
totalling  170,000  members.6  Nineteen  state  societies  were 
sharing  the  responsibilities  of  the  nation-wide  campaign. 
Agents  were  at  work  in  all  parts  of  the  Union,  for  the  mis¬ 
sionary  motive  was  so  strong  that  workers  were  constantly 
seeking  out  communities  where  the  temperance  message  had 
not  been  heard.  New  York,  Massachusetts  and  Pennsylvania 
were  unusually  generous  in  devoting  funds  to  the  mainte¬ 
nance  of  agents  in  the  newer  states  of  the  South  and  West.7 
But  the  work  at  home  was  not  neglected  for  the  sake  of 
fields  afar  off.  Each  state  society  was  urged  to  encourage 
the  formation  of  county  units  which  would  regulate  the 
activities  of  the  smaller  groups.  As  the  officers  of  the 
county  societies  would  be  ex-officio  members  of  the  executive 
committee  of  the  state  society,  unity  of  action  could  thus  be 
secured.  In  New  York  the  suggestion  was  most  carefully 
worked  out  through  a  federation  based  upon  the  school 
district  associations  and  culminating  in  the  state  organiza¬ 
tion,  which  gave  every  society  in  the  state  an  opportunity 
to  make  its  influence  felt.8  The  system  was  well  designed 
to  preserve  at  least  the  semblance  of  uniform  methods,  in 
spite  of  the  inevitable  diversity  resulting  from  rapid  ex¬ 
pansion.  In  order  to  foster  a  consciousness  of  similar 
purposes,  the  executive  committee  of  the  national  society 
recommended  in  1832  that  in  all  cities,  towns  and  villages 
throughout  the  country  meetings  be  held  on  February  26, 
the  anniversary  of  the  formation  of  the  American  Temper¬ 
ance  Society.  The  suggestion  was  adopted  the  next  year, 
and  from  Maine  to  Louisiana  simultaneous  gatherings  cele- 

«  P.  T.  D.,  I,  28,  38. 

7  Ibid.,  I,  236. 

8  Temperance  Recorder,  March  6,  1832,  pp.  1-2. 


ORGANIZING  FOR  VICTORY  129 

brated  the  progress  of  the  reform.9  Official  estimates  of 
the  time  placed  the  number  of  societies  at  4000  with  more 
than  500,000  active  members,  a  fact  which,  in  the  opinion 
of  the  reformers,  warranted  national  rejoicing.10 

An  analysis  of  the  records  for  1831  reveals  the  numerical 
preponderance  in  the  reform  of  New  Englanders  and  their 
widely  scattered  descendants.11  Although  less  than  one- 
sixth  of  the  people  of  the  United  States  at  that  time  lived  in 
the  six  states  north-east  of  the  Hudson,  they  had  formed 
more  than  one-third  of  the  temperance  societies  with  nearly 
one-third  of  the  total  membership.  Furthermore,  a  signifi¬ 
cant  relation  between  the  expansion  of  New  England  and  the 
growth  of  temperance  sentiment  was  apparent  from  the 
geographical  distribution  of  the  societies  in  New  York  and 
Ohio.  Of  the  700  organizations  in  the  former  state,  em¬ 
bracing  fully  fifty  per  cent  of  the  temperance  forces  in  the 
entire  country,  a  majority  were  located  in  districts  which 
had  received  the  largest  immigration  from  New  England.  A 
survey  of  the  most  pronounced  temperance  counties  shows 
a  solid  belt,  beginning  with  Broome  County  on  the  Pennsyl¬ 
vania  line  and  running  north-west  through  Tioga,  Cortland, 
Tompkins,  Yates,  Ontario,  Monroe  and  Genesee.  Histor¬ 
ically,  this  section  belonged  in  large  part  to  the  two  tracts 
ceded,  as  real  estate,  by  New  York  to  Massachusetts  in  1786. 
Genesee,  Ontario,  Monroe  and  Yates  were  included  in  the 
more  than  six  million  acres,  known  as  the  “Genesee  Country,” 
which  Massachusetts  sold  to  Oliver  Phelps  and  Philip  Gor- 

8  P.  T.  D.,  I,  232-233;  The  Georgian  (Savannah),  March  2,  1833. 

10  P.  T.  D.,  I,  161. 

11  The  figures  reported  in  1831  are  used  because  they  represent  the 
most  accurate  enumeration  ever  made  by  the  early  societies.  There  are 
undoubtedly  omissions,  particularly  in  the  southern  and  western  states, 
but  the  relative  strength  of  the  reform  in  the  various  sections  seems 
to  be  truly  represented.  The  lists  are  given  in  the  Journal  of  Humanity 
files  for  1831,  to  which  I  have  added  societies  from  other  available 
records. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


130 

ham,  while  Tioga  and  Broome  were  embraced  in  the  tract 
sold  to  John  Brown  and  others.12  Both  the  Brown  and 
Phelps-Gorham  purchases  became  replicas  of  New  England 
during  the  decades  between  1810  and  1830,  and  their  inhabit¬ 
ants  proved  ready  converts  to  the  temperance  gospel.  In  Ohio 
a  similar  situation  existed.  One-quarter  of  the  societies  in 
the  state  were  located  in  that  second  New  England  which  had 
been  planted  in  the  Western  Reserve  lands  of  Connecticut. 
Portage  County  alone,  peopled  largely  by  families  from 
Massachusetts,  Connecticut  and  western  New  York,  contained 
ten  organizations  active  in  reform  work.  Two  other  sec¬ 
tions  of  New  England  settlement  were  important  strongholds 
of  the  temperance  forces,  the  Marietta  district  along  the 
Ohio  River  and  the  villages  near  Granville  and  Worthington 
in  the  centre  of  the  state.13  In  Pennsylvania  a  major¬ 
ity  of  the  societies  were  supported  by  the  descendants  of 
Welsh  and  English  Quakers  and  Scotch-Irish  Presbyterians. 
The  latter  were  chiefly  responsible  for  the  fact  that  with¬ 
in  the  two  westernmost  tiers  of  counties  lived  more  than 
thirty  per  cent  of  all  Pennsylvanians  who  had  signed  the 
pledge. 

South  of  the  Mason-Dixon  line  and  the  Ohio  River  there 
were  only  15,000  pledged  to  abstinence  from  distilled  spirits, 
less  than  ten  per  cent  of  the  abstainers  in  the  whole  country. 
Of  this  number  at  least  half  were  members  of  societies  in 
Virginia  and  Georgia,  where  the  southern  phase  of  the  move¬ 
ment  had  its  origin.  There  had  been  no  causal  relation 
between  the  temperance  organizations  in  New  England  and 
New  York  and  the  beginnings  of  reform  in  the  states  of  the 

12  O.  Turner,  Phelps-0  orham  Purchase,  p.  40;  Lois  K.  Mathews,  Ex¬ 
pansion  of  New  England,  pp.  155-1 69. 

13  See  map  opposite.  The  geographical  location  of  the  various  tem¬ 
perance  societies  has  been  determined  from  the  early  records.  Each 
dot  represents  the  existence  of  five  societies  within  a  radius  of  less  than 
twenty  miles.  For  data  on  the  expansion  of  New  England  see  Mathews, 
op.  cit.,  pp.  178-181. 


ORGANIZING  FOR  VICTORY  131 

seaboard  South,  but  many  of  the  southern  societies  had 
affiliated  with  the  national  society  before  1831.  When 
Abner  Clopton,  an  influential  Baptist  preacher  in  Virginia, 
began  to  organize  the  temperance  work  in  his  own  state  in 
1826,  he  had  not  heard  of  the  formation  of  the  American 
Temperance  Society  a  few  months  earlier  in  Boston,  and 
his  efforts  were  entirely  independent  of  what  was  being  done 
in  other  parts  of  the  nation.  His  success  in  persuading  the 
Baptists  and  Methodists  to  interest  themselves  was  re¬ 
sponsible  for  the  spread  of  Clopton  societies  throughout  the 
western  part  of  Virginia,  whence  the}'  finally  secured  a  foot¬ 
hold  in  the  Carolinas  and  Georgia.  Adiel  Sherwood,  Clop- 
ton’s  most  zealous  disciple  in  Georgia,  maintained  that  in 
his  state  temperance  reform  was  growth  of  the  southern  soil 
and  owed  little  to  the  northern  societies.14  Although  this 
was  in  a  sense  true,  Georgia  and  Virginia  with  the  rest  of  the 
southern  states  profited  much  by  the  missionary  work  done 
through  the  New  York  and  New  England  societies.  Sher¬ 
wood,  himself,  a  native  of  New  York  who  had  studied  theology 
in  1817  under  Leonard  Woods  at  Andover,  was  no  stranger 
to  temperance  sentiment  in  New  England. 

The  fact  that  temperance  groups  in  different  parts  of  the 
country  did  not  owe  their  existence  to  a  common  source 
caused  some  to  fear  for  the  unity  and  harmony  of  the  move¬ 
ment.  Besides,  many  workers  were  convinced  that  individual 
efforts  were  not  properly  supervised  and  that  the  public 
was  not  aware  of  the  magnitude  of  the  enterprise.  It 
seemed  advisable,  therefore,  to  focus  attention  on  the  strength 
and  co-operation  of  the  various  groups  through  the  medium 
of  a  national  convention.  The  executive  committee  of  the 
American  Temperance  Society  issued  a  call  for  a  meeting 
i*  Jeter,  A  Memoir  of  Abner  Clopton,  pp.  171-173;  Seomp,  op.  cit., 
pp.  236-240.  New  York  ranked  first  among  the  states  in  the  percent¬ 
age  of  total  population  enrolled  in  temperance  societies.  Next  in  order 
came  Connecticut,  Vermont,  Rhode  Island,  Massachusetts,  Maine, 
New  Hampshire,  Georgia,  Virginia,  and  Ohio. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


132 

of  delegates  from  all  county  and  state  societies  to  be  held  in 
Independence  Hall,  Philadelphia,  on  May  24,  1833.  The 
response  surprised  the  most  optimistic,  for  more  than  four 
hundred  representatives  of  organizations  in  twenty-one  states 
attended  the  sessions.  Chancellor  Reuben  Walworth  of 
New  York  presided  with  such  grace  and  wisdom  that  harmony 
was  preserved  in  spite  of  the  variety  of  opinions  voiced  by 
the  delegates.  A  steering  committee,  controlled  by  repre¬ 
sentatives  of  New  York  and  Massachusetts,  outlined  matters 
for  discussion  and  suggested  a  plan  for  a  permanent  body 
which  would  formulate  the  policy  of  the  temperance  forces  in 
the  future.15 

On  the  floor  of  the  convention  several  important  questions 
were  settled  to  the  satisfaction  of  a  majority  of  the  delegates. 
While  the  type  of  pledge  was  under  discussion,  a  small 
group  of  conservatives  challenged  the  soundness  of  the 
abstinence  principle,  and  a  radical  minority  desired  to  place 
fermented  liquors  as  well  as  ardent  spirits  under  the  ban. 
The  sentiment  of  the  majority,  however,  was  strongly  in 
favour  of  retaining  without  amendment  the  pledge  of  “total 
abstinence  from  the  use  of  ardent  spirits.”  Not  so  easily 
settled  was  the  question  of  the  proper  attitude  to  be  adopted 
toward  the  liquor  traffic.  The  debate,  which  at  times  waxed 
acrimonious,  was  precipitated  by  the  introduction  of  a 
resolution  declaring  the  traffic  in  distilled  spirits  to  be 
morally  wrong  and  deserving  of  the  severest  condemnation. 
Opposition  came  from  several  quarters.  Some  maintained 
that  such  a  pronouncement  would  alienate  many  from  the 
cause,  since  it  would  be  considered  an  unnecessary  impeach¬ 
ment  of  the  “pious  dealers”  of  former  days.  Others  insisted 

is  The  committee  was  composed  of  such  able  and  distinguished 
philanthropists  as  Reuben  Walworth,  Gerrit  Smith,  Edward  C.  Delavan 
and  Hugh  Maxwell  of  New  York,  Justin  Edwards  and  John  Tappan 
of  Massachusetts,  Timothy  Pitkin  of  Connecticut,  Peter  D.  Vroom  of 
New  Jersey,  Roberts  Yaux  of  Pennsylvania,  and  D.  W.  Lathrop  of 
Ohio. 


ORGANIZING  FOR  VICTORY  133 

that  denunciation  would  only  serve  to  arouse  the  bitter 
hostility  of  those  engaged  in  the  business  and  would  persuade 
none  to  abandon  the  traffic.  In  spite  of  objections,  however, 
the  convention  finally  adopted  the  resolution,  justifying  its 
action  on  the  ground  that  a  definite  statement  might  deter 
honourable  men  from  engaging  in  a  disreputable  business.16 

The  creation  of  a  national  organization  was  effected  with¬ 
out  any  difficulty.  On  recommendation  of  the  special  com¬ 
mittee  the  delegates  decided  that  the  United  States  Tem¬ 
perance  Union  should  be  formed  on  a  federation  basis,  the 
membership  to  consist  of  the  officers  of  the  American  Tem¬ 
perance  Society,  the  officers  of  the  twenty-three  state  so¬ 
cieties  and  representatives  from  as  many  local  societies  as 
desired  to  join.  The  work  of  the  Union  was  to  be  placed 
in  the  hands  of  a  president  and  executive  committee  selected 
by  the  members,  who  should  serve  as  the  final  authority  in  all 
matters  pertaining  to  the  spread  of  temperance  propaganda. 
Every  society  in  the  country  was  urged  to  become  affiliated 
with  the  Union  in  order  that  the  full  strength  of  the  move¬ 
ment  might  be  represented.  For  the  first  president  of  the 
new  organization  the  members  chose  that  conscientious  and 
benevolent  aristocrat,  Stephen  Van  Rensselaer,  whose  offer 
to  publish  and  distribute  100,000  copies  of  the  proceedings 
of  the  convention  had  been  accepted  with  enthusiasm.  By 
reason  of  his  large  estates  in  New  York,  General  Van 
Rensselaer  was  one  of  the  richest  men  of  his  day,  and  he 
devoted  a  generous  proportion  of  his  income  to  philanthropic 
enterprises  of  an  educational  and  moral  character.  He 
was  assured  able  assistance  in  the  new  work  by  the  selection 
of  Judge  William  Jay  of  Westchester  County,  New  York, 
as  chairman  of  the  executive  committee.  Judge  Jay  was 
well-known  in  all  parts  of  the  country  for  his  ability  as  a 
jurist  and  his  activity  in  a  wide  variety  of  reform  move¬ 
ments.  He  had  joined  Elias  Boudinot  and  others  in  forming 
is  p,  T.  D.,  I,  342;  Marsh,  op.  tit.,  p.  37. 


134  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

the  American  Bible  Society  in  1810,  had  been  prominent  in 
the  organization  of  the  New  York  City  Anti-Slavery  Society, 
and  had  contributed  constantly  to  the  literature  of  protest 
against  duelling,  gambling,  Sabbath-breaking  and  intemper¬ 
ance.  Though  his  interests  were  many,  he  had  proved  in  the 
temperance  organizations  of  his  own  state  that  he  was  willing 
to  give  a  large  share  of  his  time  to  that  particular  cause. 
His  associates  on  the  executive  committee,  chosen  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  sectional  strength  of  the  reform,  were  from  New 
England  and  Pennsylvania.  Massachusetts  was  repre¬ 
sented  by  Harrison  Gray,  the  Boston  publisher  and  book¬ 
seller;  Connecticut  by  Cyrus  Yale,  long  pastor  of  the 
Congregational  Church  in  New  Hartford ;  New  Hampshire 
by  Richard  Boylston  17  of  Amherst,  whose  interest  in  tem¬ 
perance  was  a  by-product  of  his  efforts  to  improve  conditions 
on  American  farms ;  and  Pennsylvania  by  Samuel  Agnew, 
a  popular  physician  of  Lancaster,  who  voiced  the  opinion 
of  many  of  his  profession  in  regard  to  the  use  of  distilled 
liquors.18 

It  was  not  an  accident  that  the  officers  of  the  Union  were 
men  who  had  been  successful  in  business  and  the  professions, 
for  the  temperance  forces  consciously  strove  to  gain  prestige 
for  their  cause  from  the  prominence  of  their  official  leaders. 
In  New  York,  for  example,  the  personnel  of  the  state 
society’s  roster  of  officers  wTas  unusually  impressive.  The 
president  was  Judge  Reuben  H.  Walworth,  one  of  the  lead¬ 
ing  lawyers  of  Saratoga  County,  then  serving  the  state  as 
chancellor.  The  vice-presidents,  representing  the  most  im¬ 
portant  districts,  were  Judge  William  Jay  of  Westchester 
County;  David  Buell,  Jr.,  of  Troy,  vice-president  of  Rens- 

it  Richard  Boylston  in  1836  became  editor  of  the  Farmer’s  Cabinet, 
a  periodical  devoted  to  the  promotion  of  scientific  methods  of  agricul¬ 
ture. 

is  The  secretaries  or  agents  of  the  Union  were  John  Marsh  and  Isaac 
S.  Lloyd  of  Pennsylvania  and  Thomas  Brainard  of  Ohio.  Marsh,  op. 
cit.,  pp.  37-38;  P.  T.  D.,  II,  14. 


ORGANIZING  FOR  VICTORY  135 

selaer  Institute ;  Henry  Huntington,  wealthy  merchant  of 
Rome  and  president  of  the  Utica  Bank;  Henry  Dwight, 
president  of  the  Bank  of  Geneva ;  Judge  Ashley  Sampson  of 
Rochester;  Ben  Johnson,  leader  of  the  Tompkins  County 
bar;  and  the  venerable  John  Watts  of  New  York  City, 
founder  of  the  Leake  and  Watts  Orphan  House  and  presi¬ 
dent  of  the  New  York  Dispensary.  The  management  of  the 
society’s  work  was  entrusted  to  Edward  C.  Delavan  of  Al¬ 
bany,  a  wealthy  merchant  who  had  amassed  a  fortune  in 
the  wholesale  hardware  business.19  The  New  York  leader¬ 
ship  was  typical  of  that  elsewhere  in  the  nation.  In  Penn¬ 
sylvania  Roberts  Vaux,  the  Quaker  philanthropist  and  re¬ 
former,20  was  succeeded  in  the  presidency  of  the  state  society 
b}’  Matthew  Newkirk,  whose  dr}rgoods  business  in  Philadel¬ 
phia  had  brought  him  a  substantial  fortune.  His  means  en¬ 
abled  him  to  become  one  of  the  foremost  railroad  builders 
of  his  day,  a  benefactor  and  trustee  of  Princeton,  and  a 
generous  contributor  to  the  financial  support  of  temperance 
work.  Newkirk’s  most  influential  associate  was  Thomas  P. 
Cope,  founder  of  the  famous  Philadelphia  importing  house 
and  manufacturer  of  cotton  goods.  Like  Newkirk  he  in¬ 
vested  a  part  of  his  fortune  in  railroads,  and  his  Liverpool 
packets  were  an  important  part  of  the  American  merchant 
marine  during  the  decade  of  the  forties.21 

New  Jersey  possessed  an  able  and  efficient  leader  in  Theo^ 
dore  Frelinghuysen,  who  became  president  of  the  state  soci¬ 
ety  while  he  was  in  the  United  States  Senate.  Though  his 
political  and  educational  interests  took  much  of  his  time 
and  energy,  he  remained  faithful  to  the  temperance  reform 

19  Annual  Report,  New  York  Temperance  Society  (1830). 

20  Thomas  M.  Pettit,  Memoir  of  Roberts  Vaux  contains  an  account  of 
Yaux’s  work  in  behalf  of  public  education,  prison  reform,  care  of  the 
insane,  and  institutions  for  the  deaf  and  dumb. 

21  Data  in  regard  to  Newkirk  and  Cope  may  be  found  in  Biographical 
Encyclopedia  of  Pennsylvania  of  the  Nineteenth  Century. 


186  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

throughout  his  lifetime.22  Nor  was  he  the  only  public  of¬ 
ficial  prominent  among  the  reformers  during  the  decade  of 
the  thirties.  In  Ohio  the  state  society  was  presided  over 
first  by  Governor  Allen  Trimble,  who  was  succeeded  by  Gov¬ 
ernor  Robert  Lucas,  while  in  Maine  Governor  Robert  P.  Dun¬ 
lap  secured  recognition  for  his  state  in  the  national  councils 
of  the  movement.23  Judge  Willard  Hall  of  the  United 
States  District  Court  and  Senator  Arnold  Naudain  directed 
the  Delaware  society  for  the  greater  part  of  a  decade.  In 
the  neighbouring  state  of  Maryland  Judge  Stevenson  Archer 
of  the  Court  of  Appeals  was  responsible  for  the  most  success* 
ful  years.24 

As  every  responsible  leader  realizes  the  value  of  attaching 
to  his  following  people  of  consequence  in  the  community,  so 
the  temperance  workers  understood  the  importance  of  en¬ 
rolling  in  their  societies  men  whose  achievements  commanded 
respect.  This  was  the  idea  underlying  the  campaign  begun 
in  1832  to  organize  legislative  temperance  societies.  The 
members  of  Congress  and  state  legislatures  were  to  be 
brought  together,  not  for  the  purpose  of  securing  legislation 
against  the  liquor  traffic,  but  rather  that  the  example  of  the 
law-makers  might  be  used  to  influence  their  constituents. 
With  this  end  in  view  a  preliminary  meeting  was  held  in 
Washington,  D.  C.,  during  the  spring  of  1832,  at  which 
plans  for  a  Congressional  society  were  discussed.  The  en¬ 
thusiasm  of  Senator  Frelinghuysen,  who  was  largely  respon¬ 
sible  for  the  gathering,  was  shared  by  Senator  Felix  Grundy 

22  L.  Q.  C.  Elmer,  “Reminiscences  of  New  Jersey,”  New  Jersey  His¬ 
torical  Society,  Collections,  VII,  440-456.  Frelinghuysen  was  Chan¬ 
cellor  of  New  York  University,  vice-presidential  candidate  on  the  Clay 
ticket  in  1844,  president  of  the  Board  of  Commissioners  for  Foreign 
Missions  (1841),  American  Bible  Society  (1846),  Rutgers  College 
(1850). 

23  P.  T.  D.,  II,  14. 

24  For  lists  of  officers  of  state  societies  see  Journal  of  the  American 
Temperance  Union ,  January,  1838. 


ORGANIZING  FOR  VICTORY  137 

of  Tennessee  and  the  Secretary  of  War,  Lewis  Cass.  Daniel 
Webster,  never  known  as  a  foe  of  alcoholic  stimulants,  was 
persuaded  to  offer  the  resolution  that  some  sort  of  organi¬ 
zation  be  effected  to  combat  the  evils  attendant  upon  the 
use  of  distilled  spirits.25  Definite  action  was  postponed  un¬ 
til  February  26,  1833,  when  the  American  Congressional 
Temperance  Society  was  formed  for  the  purpose  of  discoun¬ 
tenancing  the  use  of  ardent  spirit  and  the  traffic  in  it,  hy 
example  and  hy  hind  moral  influence .26  Secretary  Cass, 
w'ho  at  the  time  was  receiving  much  commendation  for  his 
order  of  November,  1832,  removing  ardent  spirits  from  the 
regular  army  ration,  was  chosen  president.  To  assist  him 
an  executive  committee  was  selected  composed  of  Senators 
Theodore  Frelinghuysen  of  New  Jersey  and  Arnold  Nau- 
dain  of  Delaware,  and  Representatives  John  Blair  of  Ten¬ 
nessee,  George  N.  Briggs  of  Massachusetts  and  Eleutheros 
Cook  of  Ohio.27  Representative  Cook  voiced  the  appeal  to 
national  pride  in  his  boastful  assertion  that  Americans  had 
given  mankind  the  first  example  of  the  benefits  of  temperance 
and  were,  therefore,  peculiarly  obligated  to  carry  on  the 
work.  The  nations  of  the  world,  he  believed,  had  caught  the 
significance  of  the  example  set  for  them  and  were  engaged 
in  imitating  it.  Certainly  it  would  be  a  national  disgrace,  if 
the  United  States,  after  raising  hopes  so  high,  should  fail 
to  continue  its  moral  leadership.28 

25  Documents  and  Records  of  the  Massachusetts  Temperance  Society, 
pp.  36-37;  Marsh,  op.  cit.,  pp.  31-33. 

20  Proceedings  of  the  Convention  for  the  Promotion  of  the  Cause  of 
Temperance,  p.  47. 

27  The  honorary  vice-presidents  were:  Senators  Samuel  Bell  of  New 
Hampshire,  Gideon  Tomlinson  of  Connecticut,  William  Wilkins  of 
Pennsylvania,  Thomas  Ewing  of  Ohio,  Felix  Grundy  of  Tennessee,  John 
Tipton  of  Indiana,  and  Representatives  John  Reed  of  Massachusetts, 
Lewis  Condict  of  New  Jersey,  David  Wardwell  of  New  York  and  James 
Wayne  of  Georgia. 

28  Proceedings  of  the  Convention  for  the  Promotion  of  the  Cause  of 
Temperance,  p.  48. 


I 


138  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

The  temperance  forces  welcomed  the  opportunity  to  capi¬ 
talize  political  prestige  for  the  spread  of  their  doctrines. 
Lewis  Cass  was  hailed  as  the  great  exemplar  of  total  ab¬ 
stinence.  Of  his  career  one  enthusiast  wrote : 

Notwithstanding  the  numerous  and  diversified  temptations  and 
exposures  of  a  frontier  life,  he  passed  through  a  distinguished 
career  of  usefulness  without  having  ever  tasted  ardent  spirit. 
In  his  numerous  journeys  as  a  commissioner  for  the  United  States, 
in  the  damp  and  chilling  climates  of  the  northwestern  lakes,  and 
through  the  swamps,  fens  and  miasmatic  tracts  of  the  Mississippi, 
his  uniform  abstinence  from  spirituous  drinks,  had  made  him  a 
model  of  temperance,  before  temperance  societies  had  been  heard 
of  in  those  remote  solitudes.29 

With  such  a  leader  the  Congressional  Temperance  Society 
seemed  destined  to  wield  a  powerful  influence.30  It  was  ex¬ 
pected  that  lesser  politicians  would  imitate  the  example  of 
the  national  legislators  and  organize  legislative  temperance 
associations  in  their  respective  states.  This  was  exactly 
what  happened,  but  the  movement  originated  in  the  work  of 
individual  reformers  and  not  in  any  missionary  work  done 
by  the  Congressional  society.  Massachusetts  was  the  first 
state  to  take  action.  On  March  15,  1833,  a  legislative  tem¬ 
perance  society  was  formed  at  Boston  with  ex-governor  Levi 
Lincoln  as  president.31  Within  a  few  months  fully  half  the 
members  of  the  Ohio  and  Kentucky  legislatures  pledged  them¬ 
selves  “to  abstain  from  drinking  ardent  spirit.”  32  During 
the  next  two  years  legislative  temperance  societies  became 
the  rule  rather  than  the  exception.  Their  number  indicated 
that  many  politicians,  witnessing  the  change  in  customs  and 
the  growing  popularity  of  abstinence,  believed  there  was 

29  Am.  Quart.  Temp.  Mag.,  May,  1833,  p.  120. 

30  Cass  remained  president  until  1837,  when  the  society  was  reorgan¬ 
ized  under  the  leadership  of  Felix  Grundy  of  Tennessee. 

31  Mass.  Spy,  March  27,  1833. 

32  P.  T.  D.,  I,  345-346. 


ORGANIZING  FOR  VICTORY  139 

nothing  to  lose  and  probably  something  to  gain  by  accepting 
the  standards  of  the  reformers. 

By  the  middle  of  the  decade  the  temperance  cause  had  a 
following  that  was  well-organized  and  determined  to  win  its 
objective.  Every  state  was  enrolled  in  the  movement. 
From  the  incomplete  returns  of  the  state  societies  in  1831 
statistics  had  been  compiled  showing  more  than  5000  local 
groups  with  a  membership  of  approximately  1,000,000,  an 
increase  in  three  years  of  five  hundred  per  cent.33  There  was 
additional  joy  in  the  fact  that  these  organizations  had  at 
their  disposal  the  means  of  carrying  on  an  educational  cam¬ 
paign.  In  spite  of  inadequate  funds  and  general  indiffer¬ 
ence,  the  friends  of  temperance  had  succeeded  in  establish¬ 
ing  a  press  of  their  own  which  served  to  carry  propaganda 
into  all  parts  of  the  nation.  The  first  issue  of  the  National 
Philanthropist,  printed  at  Boston  on  March  4,  1826,  under 
the  editorship  of  Rev.  William  Collier,  was  followed  by  a 
score  of  similar  publications,  many  of  which  were  influential 
though  short-lived.34  The  American  Temperance  Society 
established  the  Journal  of  Humanity  at  Andover,  Massachu¬ 
setts,  in  1829  and  supported  its  publication  until  February, 
1833.  In  1836  there  were  eleven  weekly  and  monthly  jour¬ 
nals  devoted  solely  to  the  interests  of  temperance,  while 
many  religious  periodicals,  notably  the  Christian  Spectator 
and  the  New  York  Observer,  carried  in  their  columns  items 
pertaining  to  the  reform.30  Through  the  interest  of  Wil- 

33  Ibid.,  342. 

34  From  January  to  August,  1828,  William  Lloyd  Garrison  edited  the 
National  Philanthropist.  Noteworthy  among  these  early  papers  was 
the  Genius  of  Temperance  edited  by  Phineas  Crandall  at  Gardiner, 
Maine. 

35  The  more  important  journals  were:  Recorder,  Albany;  Herald, 
Concord,  New  Hampshire;  Banner,  Northampton,  Mass.;  Pledge, 
Lowell,  Mass.;  Recorder,  Philadelphia;  Herald,  Baltimore;  Advocate, 
Columbus,  Ohio;  Star,  Richmond,  Va.;  Cold  Water  Man,  Natchez  Miss.; 
Herald,  Augusta,  Maine.  See  Journal  of  American  Temperance  Union, 
January,  1837. 


140  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

liam  A.  Hallock,  agent  of  the  American  Tract  Society,  funds 
of  that  organization  were  assigned  to  the  publication  and 
circulation  of  tracts  containing  the  standard  temperance 
arguments. 

All  this  literature  conveyed  to  its  readers  the  impression 
that  popular  misconceptions,  which  had  handicapped  the 
workers  in  the  early  days  of  the  movement,  were  slowly 
being  corrected.  The  idea  that  ardent  spirits  prevented 
disease  and  relieved  fatigue,  so  vigorously  attacked  by  Dr. 
Rush,  was  being  discredited  by  the  investigations  of  physi¬ 
cians  and  the  experiments  of  employers  of  labour.  Scien¬ 
tific  articles  on  the  subject  by  Dr.  Reuben  Mussey  of  Dart¬ 
mouth  College,  Dr.  Walter  Channing  of  Boston  and  Dr. 
Thomas  Sewall  of  Washington,  D.  C.,  were  changing  the  at¬ 
titude  of  many  in  the  medical  profession.  Seventy-five 
physicians  in  the  state  of  New  York,  for  example,  had  signed 
a  statement  to  the  effect  that  distilled  spirits  would  no 
longer  occupy  a  prominent  place  in  their  list  of  curatives.38 
The  College  of  Physicians  and  Surgeons  in  Philadelphia  had 
enlarged  its  curriculum  by  introducing  a  course  in  the  pa¬ 
thology  of  intemperance.37  State  medical  associations  in 
Massachusetts  and  Vermont  had  taken  the  lead  in  officially 
denouncing  the  general  use  of  spirituous  liquors.38 

Equally  encouraging  to  the  reformers  were  the  reports 
from  employers  and  labourers.  In  response  to  a  question¬ 
naire  sent  out  by  the  New  York  State  Temperance  Society 
in  1832  to  manufacturing  establishments  in  New  England  and 
the  middle  Atlantic  states,  replies  from  forty  employers  in¬ 
dicated  that  they  were  unanimously  opposed  to  the  use  of 
ardent  spirits  by  their  employees,  because  they  believed  that 
labour  efficiency  was  thereby  impaired.39  The  superintend- 

88  Annual  Report,  New  York  State  Temperance  Society  (1833). 

37  Journal  of  Humanity ,  Feb.  17,  1830,  p.  153. 

88  Ibid.,  p.  154. 

89  Annual  Report,  N.  Y.  State  Temperance  Society  (1833). 


ORGANIZING  FOR  VICTORY  141 

ent  of  construction  work  in  connection  with  the  building  of 
the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  had  issued  a  statement  in 
1830: 

The  destructive  and  demoralizing  effects  of  the  use  of  ardent 
spirits  became  so  manifest  in  producing  riot,  and  other  flagrant 
disorders,  that  I  determined,  with  the  sanction  of  the  president 
of  the  company,  to  prohibit  the  use  of  it  in  all  future  contracts. 
And  accordingly  no  contract  since  then  [July,  1829]  has  been 
made  either  for  graduation  or  for  masonry,  in  which  a  clause 
was  not  inserted  to  that  effect.  It  is  believed  that  the  work 
may  be  executed  without  the  use  of  this  dreadful  poison,  more 
advantageously  to  the  interests  of  the  company,  and  certainly 
much  more  agreeably  to  its  officers  and  contractors,  as  well  as 
beneficially  to  the  laborers  themselves.40 

City  labour,  at  this  time  manifesting  class  consciousness  in 
the  organization  of  scores  of  trade  unions  and  labour  soci¬ 
eties,  became  interested  in  the  problem  of  intemperance. 
Workingmen’s  abstinence  societies  appeared  in  the  cities  of 
New  York,  Baltimore,  Philadelphia  and  Boston  between  1833 
and  1837.  In  Philadelphia  an  interesting  experiment  was 
tried.  Several  hundred  artisans  and  mechanics  decided  on 
February  3,  1835,  to  abstain  from  using  ardent  spirits  for 
a  period  of  six  wreeks  and  at  the  end  of  that  time  to  con¬ 
sider  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  abstinence.  The 
test  proved  so  satisfactory  to  the  participants  that  three 
hundred  signed  the  pledge  and  organized  the  Mechanics  and 
Workingmen’s  Temperance  Society  of  Philadelphia.  Their 
influence  in  the  labour  circles  of  the  city  was  sufficiently  well- 
known  to  inspire  Daniel  Webster  to  write  a  letter  compli¬ 
menting  them  on  the  character  of  their  work.41 

On  the  farm  as  well  as  in  the  city  employer  and  employee 

Journal  of  Humanity,  Feb.  17,  1830,  pp.  153-154. 

Pa.  Temperance  Recorder,  March,  1835,  p.  2;  April,  pp.  10-11; 
August,  p.  48;  N.  Y.  Observer,  July  3,  1830. 


142  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

were  adopting  a  new  attitude  toward  the  use  of  distilled 
liquors.  Farmers  were  becoming  convinced,  so  ran  the  re¬ 
ports  from  the  rural  communities,  that  haying  and  harvest¬ 
ing,  barn-raising  and  fence-building,  ploughing  and  planting 
could  be  done  more  quickly  and  more  cheaply  without  the 
stimulus  of  whisky.  Since  he  no  longer  believed  that  alcohol 
relieved  fatigue,  the  labourer  was  less  dependent  upon  ardent 
spirits  to  aid  him  in  the  heavy  tasks  of  field  and  forest.  As 
the  notion  that  cold  water  was  dangerous  in  hot  weather 
slowly  disappeared,  farm  hands  were  less  averse  to  working 
for  wages  that  did  not  include  a  daily  ration  of  whisky  or 
rum.  In  the  frontier  communities  of  Michigan,  Illinois 
and  Missouri  forests  were  being  cleared  away  and  fields  culti¬ 
vated  with  comparatively  slight  recourse  to  alcoholic  stimu¬ 
lants  of  any  sort.  That  the  drinking  customs  of  former 
generations  were  fast  becoming  obsolete  was  the  story  told 
in  the  records  of  the  temperance  societies.42 

As  a  fair  criterion  of  the  changing  tone  of  public  senti¬ 
ment  the  reformers  cited  the  restraint  which  w'as  practised 
on* holidays  and  other  special  occasions.  The  gay  round  of 
social  calls,  which  characterized  New  Year’s  Day  in  the  east¬ 
ern  cities,  had  always  been  accompanied  by  a  considerable 
consumption  of  intoxicants.  In  the  decade  following  1830, 
however,  many  families  refused  to  serve  their  guests  with  dis¬ 
tilled  spirits,  replacing  the  stronger  beverages  with  hot  coffee 
or  mild  wunes.43  The  New  York  Sun  and  the  New  York 
Evening  Post  commented  editorially  in  1837  upon  several 
news  items  indicative  of  a  change  in  social  usage  apparently 

Journal  of  Humanity,  March  10,  1830,  p.  167;  Sept.  9,  1830,  p. 
61;  April  28,  1831,  p.  194;  Am.  Quart.  Temp.  May.,  May,  1833,  p.  176; 
Pa.  Temp.  Rec.,  Oct.,  1835,  p.  64;  Diary  of  Elisha  Risdon  in  C.  E.  San¬ 
ford,  Early  History  of  Hopkinton,  N.  Y.,  p.  308;  Western  Carolinian, 
May  10,  1834;  Silas  Farmer,  History  of  Detroit  and  Wayne  County, 
pp.  838-839;  H.  H.  Hurlbut,  Chicago  Antiquities,  pp.  108-109;  The 
Making  of  a  Township,  E.  M.  Baldwin,  editor,  p.  90;  N.  Y.  Observer, 
Aug.  28,  1830. 

43  Mass.  Spy,  June  13,  1830. 


ORGANIZING  FOR  VICTORY  143 

traceable  to  temperance  principles.  One  citizen  of  the 
metropolis  stated  that  in  eighty  calls  on  the  first  two  days 
of  the  year  lie  had  been  offered  no  ardent  spirits.  Another 
had  made  over  fifty  visits  and  had  seen  no  distilled  liquor 
provided  for  the  entertainment  of  guests.  A  third  had  been 
host  to  nearly  three  hundred  during  New  Year’s  Day,  but 
his  decanters  had  not  been  emptied,  though  in  former  years 
he  had  been  accustomed  to  replenish  them  several  times.44 
A  similar  attitude  was  evident  on  other  holidays.  The 
Fourth  of  July,  for  half  a  century  a  day  of  festivity  too 
often  marred  by  drunken  excesses,  was  becoming  rather  a 
day  devoted  to  the  struggle  against  intemperance.  The  gala 
crowds,  assembled  in  holiday  spirit  and  attire  for  a  season 
of  merry-making,  less  frequently  degenerated  into  disorderly 
mobs  because  of  an  abundance  of  intoxicants.  The  custom¬ 
ary  toasts,  so  indispensable  a  part  of  the  celebration  of  na¬ 
tional  independence,  were  more  often  drunk  in  small  beer  or 
pure  water.  In  some  localities  the  temperance  societies  took 
charge  of  the  exercises  for  the  day  and  combined  with  great 
effectiveness  in  speech  and  song  the  praise  of  patriotism  and 
sobriety.45 

Evidence  that  the  liquor  traffic  was  steadily  losing  the 
respectability  of  former  days  appeared  in  the  reports  of 
dismantled  distilleries  and  deserted  grog-shops.  Manu¬ 
facturers  and  vendors  were  abandoning  a  business  which 
caused  them  to  lose  caste  among  their  fellows.  From  a  score 
of  states  came  statistics  of  plants  which  had  discontinued  the 
manufacture,  and  stores  which  had  stopped  the  sale  of  dis¬ 
tilled  liquors.  The  report  of  the  New  York  society,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  listed  more  than  130  distilleries  which  had  ceased  oper- 

44  New  York  Sun,  January  3,  1837;  Pa.  Temp.  Rec.,  February,  1837, 

p.  11. 

45  Star  and  North  Carolina  State  Gazetteer,  July  8,  1830;  Frankfort 
Argus,  July  10,  1833;  North  Carolina  Standard,  July  12,  1837;  Alton 
Commercial  Gazette,  July  9,  1839;  National  Gazette,  July  6,  1840;  Mobile 
Commercial  Register,  July  6,  1841;  Larned,  op.  cit.,  II,  483. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


144 

ation  in  the  five  years  between  1829  and  1834.  Some  of 
these  probably  bad  been  sold  and  consolidated  with  other 
plants,  but  the  majority  were  considered  bona  fide  examples  of 
the  decline  of  the  liquor  trade.48  The  Kentucky  State  Tem¬ 
perance  Society  attributed  the  closing  of  forty-six  distilleries 
to  the  aggressive  work  of  its  ninety  auxiliaries.47  Temper¬ 
ance  stores  and  temperance  hotels  were  not  uncommon  in  any 
part  of  the  country.  Twenty-two  grocers  of  Poughkeepsie, 
New  York,  in  1832  signed  an  agreement  that  they  would  sell 
no  more  ardent  spirits  to  be  consumed  in  their  stores.48  The 
retailers  of  Ipswich,  Massachusetts,  decided  to  confine  their 
trade  in  intoxicants  to  wines  and  malt  liquors.49  The  Eng¬ 
lish  soldier-traveller,  Coke,  in  1832  observed  many  public- 
houses  at  which  distilled  spirits  were  not  obtainable.50  Since 
abstinence  from  the  use  of  ardent  spirits  was  the  accepted 
temperance  standard  of  the  time,  all  such  taverns  and  hotels 
were  known  as  temperance  houses.  New  York  claimed  to 
have  over  a  thousand  of  them  in  1834,  and  Massachusetts 
boasted  that  every  town  of  importance  within  its  limits  of¬ 
fered  a  reputable  lodging-house  for  the  abstainer.51  Trav¬ 
ellers  returning  from  the  Mississippi  valley  reported  that 
houses  which  sold  only  mild  beverages  were  more  numerous 
in  Ohio,  Indiana  and  Illinois  than  in  the  eastern  states.52 
Some  reformers  regarded  the  multiplication  of  such  taverns 
with  considerable  misgiving,  for  the  temperance  cause  was 
often  harmed  in  a  community  by  the  spectacle  of  inebriated 

*6  Annual  Re-port,  New  York  State  Temperance  Society  (1833); 
Temperance  Almanac  (1834). 

47  Am.  Quart.  Temp.  Mag.,  February,  1833,  p.  96. 

48  Temperance  Recorder,  Sept.  4,  1832,  p.  55;  Mass.  Spy,  April  7, 
1830;  National  Gazette,  April  7,  1840. 

4»  Temperance  Recorder,  1832,  p.  56. 

so  E.  T.  Coke,  A  Subaltern’s  Furlough,  I,  33. 

51  Temperance  Almanac  (1834);  Mass.  Spy,  Dec.  11,  1833,  June  11, 
1834,  Jan.  1,  1835. 

62  Journal  of  the  American  Temperance  Union,  January,  1839,  p.  4. 


ORGANIZING  FOR  VICTORY  145 

patrons  staggering  out  of  establishments  which  conspicu¬ 
ously  displayed  the  sign  “Temperance  House.” 

Since  no  enduring  reform  of  social  customs  could  be  ef¬ 
fected  without  the  support  of  the  youth  of  the  country,  it 
was  inevitable  that  the  temperance  forces  would  attempt  to 
arouse  the  interest  of  the  younger  generation  and  enroll  as 
many  as  possible  in  the  movement.  Some  states  arranged 
county  conventions  each  year  which  expressed  the  ideas  of 
the  young  men  and  endeavoured  to  give  them  a  larger  place 
in  the  councils  of  the  reform.53  In  Massachusetts  this  phase 
of  the  work  received  the  active  support  of  Horace  Mann, 
who  served  the  cause  of  temperance  with  the  same  unselfish 
devotion  that  characterized  his  efforts  in  behalf  of  a  free 
public  school  system.  Fie  was  largely  responsible  for  the 
state  convention  held  at  Worcester  in  1834  for  the  purpose 
of  launching  a  campaign  to  organize  a  young  men’s  society 
in  every  town  in  the  state.  In  spite  of  the  pressure  of  other 
duties,  he  accepted  a  position  of  leadership  and  toured  the 
state  that  he  might  urge  teachers  to  use  their  influence  in 
support  of  the  temperance  program.54 

The  work  which  Horace  Mann  championed  in  Massachu¬ 
setts  was  well  supported  in  the  colleges  and  universities.  Al¬ 
though  undergraduates  were  not  notoriously  abstemious, 
their  attitude  toward  the  use  of  ardent  spirits  seemed  to  be 
changing,  for  almost  every  institution  of  higher  learning 
could  point  to  an  active  temperance  society  as  evidence  that 
the  customs  of  former  days  were  not  in  favour  with  all  stu¬ 
dents.  Commenting  on  the  commencement  exercises  at  Dart¬ 
mouth  College  in  1833  the  New  Hampshire  Courier  said: 
“The  most  striking  feature  of  this  annual  college  celebration, 

53  Temperance  Recorder,  June  5,  1832,  p.  27;  Dow,  Reminiscences,  pp. 
212-213;  Chase,  op.  cit.,  p.  499;  H.  R.  Frost,  Address  to  the  Young 
Men’s  Society  of  Charleston  (1832)  ;  Documents  and  Records  of  the 
Massachusetts  Temperance  Society,  pp.  61-62. 

s*  Mass.  Spy,  July  2,  1834;  Clark,  op.  cit.,  p.  227. 


146  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

and  the  one  which  appears  most  prominent  to  the  eyes  of  a 
stranger,  is  the  shocking  extent  to  which  vice  and  intoxica¬ 
tion  are  carried  on  by  the  assembled  crowd.”  55  Yet  these 
boisterous  excesses  of  good  fellowship  were  probably  no  more 
representative  of  the  attitude  of  the  college  community  than 
the  earnest  efforts  of  the  young  men  who  had  formed  a  tem¬ 
perance  society  on  the  Dartmouth  campus  in  1828.  Under 
the  encouraging  guidance  of  Dr.  Reuben  D.  Mussey,  pro¬ 
fessor  of  anatomy,  whose  temperance  articles  were  nation¬ 
ally  known,  the  organization  became  a  real  part  of  the  in¬ 
stitution’s  life.58  The  question  of  abstinence  and  its  effects 
furnished  the  subject  for  numerous  debates  and  the  material 
for  literary  compositions.  When  speakers  were  in  demand  in 
the  neighbouring  towns,  members  of  the  college  society  were 
usually  available  to  carry  the  message,  with  the  result  that 
their  influence  went  far  beyond  the  circle  of  their  fellow 
students.57 

Dartmouth  was  but  one  of  many  colleges  enlisted  in  the 
fight  against  intemperance.  From  the  beginning  of  his  pres¬ 
idency  at  Amherst,  Herman  Humphrey  advocated  temper¬ 
ance  doctrines,  which  had  seemed  fundamental  to  him  when 
he  was  assisting  Lyman  Beecher  to  launch  the  Connecticut 
Moral  Society.58  He  was  ably  supported  by  Edward  Hitch¬ 
cock,  a  member  of  the  faculty,  whose  lectures  and  essays  on 
hygiene  were  frequently  pointed  against  the  use  of  distilled 
spirits.  Together  they  interested  John  Tappan  in  the  idea 

56  Cited  in  F.  P.  Wells,  History  of  Newbury ,  Vt.,  p.  256. 

56  Dr.  Mussey  had  been  a  student  under  Dr.  Rush  at  the  University 
of  Pennsylvania  in  1809  and  had  helped  to  organize  the  Massachusetts 
Society  for  the  Suppression  of  Intemperance  in  1813. 

57  The  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  at  Dartmouth  voted  in  1835  that  “no 
individual  ought  to  consider  himself  bound  in  the  least  degree  by  any 
practise  heretofore  existing,  to  furnish  a  treat  of  any  kind  upon  his 
election  as  a  member  of  this  society.”  See  John  K.  Lord,  A  History  of 
Dartmouth  College,  1815-1909,  pp.  267-269. 

58  J.  B.  Dunn,  “History  of  the  Temperance  Movement,”  Centennial 
Temperance  Volume,  p.  430. 


ORGANIZING  FOR  VICTORY  147 

of  forming  an  organization  at  the  college  to  carry  on  a  cam¬ 
paign  which  would  line  up  the  entire  student  body  against 
the  liquor  traffic.  Tappan  advanced  funds  for  prizes  to  en¬ 
courage  students  to  write  essays  on  various  phases  of  the 
question,  and  in  1830  an  association  was  formed.  In  their 
enthusiasm  the  student  leaders  directed  attention  to  the  evil 
effect  of  the  use  of  tobacco  as  well  as  liquor,  calling  the  new 
organization  the  Anti-venenean  Society  and  pledging  its 
membership  to  abstinence  from  the  use  of  anything  poison¬ 
ous  to  the  human  system.  In  spite  of  the  inclusive  character 
of  the  pledge,  the  members  confined  their  efforts  largely  to 
the  fight  against  ardent  spirits,  and  the  society  for  twenty 
years  enrolled  annually  three-fourths  of  the  student  body.59 
At  Brown,  Francis  Wayland,  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts 
Temperance  Society  at  the  time  he  became  president  of  the 
college,  did  not  allow  his  administrative  duties  to  turn  him 
aside  from  a  firm  resolution  to  discredit  the  dealers  in  in¬ 
toxicants.  His  influence  became  the  greatest  single  factor 
in  support  of  the  reform  in  Providence.00  Of  the  same 
spirit  as  Dr.  Wayland  were  such  college  presidents  as  Joshua 
Bates  of  Middlebury,  Jeremiah  Day  of  Yale  and  Eliphalet 
Nott  of  Union.  Dr.  Nott  was  undoubtedly  the  most  vigor¬ 
ous  temperance  advocate  among  the  educators  of  his  day. 
His  lectures  to  the  student  body  portrayed  the  evils  of  in¬ 
temperance  with  terrific  vividness,  and  his  writings  in  numer¬ 
ous  periodicals  were  regarded  as  authoritative  expositions  of 
the  Biblical  statements  on  the  subject.61 

Western  as  well  as  eastern  schools  figured  prominently 
in  the  reform  movement.  In  1832  Kenyon  College  at 
Gambier,  Ohio,  the  site  of  which  five  years  before  had  been  a 
deep  wilderness,  reported  a  society  with  more  than  200  mem- 

69  Edward  Hitchcock,  Reminiscences  of  Amherst  College ,  pp.  151- 
158. 

so  Mass.  Spy,  April  11,  1832. 

si  J.  B.  Dunn,  op.  cit.,  p.  442;  Cornelius  Van  Santvoord,  Memoirs  of 
Eliphalet  Nott,  pp.  181-182. 


148  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

bers.  Though  the  leaders  realized  that  many  “deep-rooted 
prejudices”  would  have  to  be  overcome,  they  felt  confident  of 
success  because  the  “people  generally  in  this  region  can  read” 
and  a  campaign  of  education  would  not  be  wasted  on  them.62 
At  the  same  time  the  work  of  this  Episcopalian  stronghold 
was  matched  by  an  earnest  group  of  Congregationalists  who 
were  laying  the  foundation  of  Oberlin  College  in  Lorain 
County  of  the  Western  Reserve.  Their  covenant  pledged 
them  to  abstain  from  all  strong  and  unnecessary  drinks,  an 
obligation  which  made  their  settlement  a  model  of  sobriety 
and  sent  forth  from  the  college  young  men  and  women  eager 
to  bear  a  hand  in  the  conversion  of  the  unreformed.63  The 
outstanding  weakness  in  the  work  of  these  college  societies 
was  the  lack  of  co-operation  between  different  institutions. 
Each  group,  concerned  with  its  own  immediate  neighbour¬ 
hood,  was  but  slightly  informed  of  the  character  of  the  move¬ 
ment  in  other  schools.  Great  as  was  the  potential  power  of 
the  educated  youth  of  the  country,  it  was  never  fully  utilized 
because  of  the  failure  to  establish  a  bond  of  unity  among 
the  youthful  workers. 

The  role  of  women  in  the  reform  had  not  been  definitely 
settled  at  the  time  that  Oberlin  College,  because  of  its  co-edu- 
cational  policy,  tended  to  emphasize  the  equal  participation 
of  men  and  women.  In  1826,  when  the  American  Temper¬ 
ance  Society  was  formed,  the  leaders  had  been  conscious  of 
the  value  of  feminine  influence  and  had  discussed  its  relation 
to  the  temperance  organizations.  Justin  Edwards  had  in¬ 
sisted  that  one  of  the  conditions  of  success  wTas  the  accept¬ 
ance  of  the  family  group  as  the  basic  unit  in  the  formation 
of  new  societies,  and  he  had  urged  that  the  wife  and  mother 

62  Temperance  Recorder,  Oct.  2,  1832,  p.  61. 

63  J.  H.  Fairchild,  Oberlin,  The  Colony  and  the  College.  Other  col¬ 
leges  which  possessed  societies  whose  work  was  recognized  were: 
Princeton,  Williams,  Dickinson,  Jefferson  (Pa.),  Miami  (Ohio),  and  the 
University  of  Georgia. 


ORGANIZING  FOR  VICTORY  149 

be  permitted  to  become  an  active  member.64  Some  there 
were  who  did  not  go  so  far  as  Edwards;  admitting  the  need 
of  woman’s  aid,  they  believed  that  her  influence  would  gener¬ 
ally  be  in  favour  of  the  cause  and  could  best  be  exercised  in 
the  home.  In  this  reform,  as  in  the  anti-slavery  movement, 
her  membership  in  societies  seemed  unnecessary  and  undesir¬ 
able,  since  it  might  alienate  men  opposed  to  the  entrance  of 
women  into  new  fields  of  activity.  A  few  concealed  their  in¬ 
nate  prejudices  behind  the  assertion  that  by  taking  a  pledge 
to  abstain  from  the  use  of  ardent  spirits  women  would  im¬ 
pair  the  “usual  confidence”  which  all  gentlemen  had  in 
their  purity  and  firmness  of  character.65  As  a  result  of 
these  differences  of  opinion,  there  was  great  diversity  in  the 
practice  of  the  temperance  forces.  Although  in  some  com¬ 
munities  women  were  specifically  excluded  from  membership, 
they  were  admitted  on  an  equality  with  men  in  most  societies. 
At  times,  however,  they  chose  to  form  separate  groups  that 
they  might  better  serve  the  interests  of  their  sex.66  A  con¬ 
vention  at  Worcester,  Massachusetts,  in  1831,  and  another 
at  Utica,  New  York,  in  1833  pronounced  definitely  in  favour 
of  encouraging  women  to  assume  a  more  responsible  role  in 
temperance  work.67 

Women  did  not  work  entirely  through  the  regular  organi¬ 
zations.  Associations  to  boycott  stores  which  sold  ardent 
spirits  were  an  effective  way  for  house-wives  to  fight  the  liq¬ 
uor  traffic.  An  Ohio  society  in  1829  adopted  the  following 
resolution:  “We  will  discountenance  all  addresses  in  any  of 
the  male  sex  with  a  view  of  matrimony,  if  they  shall  be  known 
P.  T.  D.,  I,  15. 

65  Emily  C.  Blackman,  op.  cit.,  p.  568. 

66  For  opposing  views  in  regard  to  the  activity  of  women  see  Tem¬ 
perance  Manual  (1836),  pp.  11-12;  Clark,  op.  cit.,  pp.  229-230;  John 
Boyd,  Annals  of  Winchester,  Conn.,  p.  494;  N.  Y.  Observer,  Feb.  28, 
1829,  March  12,  1834. 

6 t  Mass.  Spy,  Nov.  2,  1831;  Am.  Quart.  Temp.  Mag.,  February,  1834, 
p.  27. 


150  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

to  drink  ardent  spirits,  either  periodically  or  on  any  public 
occasion.”  Such  earnestness  would  not  be  denied.68  After 
1835  societies,  formed  to  alleviate  the  sufferings  of  the 
drunkard’s  family,  gave  women  an  opportunity  to  express 
their  sympathy  for  the  unfortunate  in  practical  service.69 
Their  success  in  dealing  with  the  poverty  and  misery  that 
followed  in  the  wake  of  intemperance  brought  commendation 
and  recognition  from  the  temperance  leaders,  and  a  new 
door  was  opened  to  them  in  the  form  of  Temperance  Ben¬ 
eficial  Associations,  which  admitted  women  on  the  same  terms 
with  men.70  These  groups  secured  large  followings  in  the 
cities,  where  the  protection  in  case  of  sickness,  offered  at 
slight  cost,  was  attractive  to  the  working  woman.  Though 
their  sphere  of  activity  was  constantly  expanding,  prior  to 
1840  women  did  not  make  their  influence  felt  in  the  larger 
councils  of  the  reform  movement.  During  the  decade  follow¬ 
ing,  however,  they  used  their  position  in  the  temperance 
work,  as  in  the  anti-slavery  crusade,  to  further  the  cause 
of  sex  equality  and  women’s  rights.71 

The  tendency  to  make  abstinence  from  strong  drink  a 
matter  of  family  concern  raised  the  question  of  the  proper 
attitude  to  be  adopted  by  the  temperance  societies  toward 
children.  Many  leaders  were  opposed  to  allowing  boys  and 
girls  to  sign  the  pledge,  on  the  ground  -that  children  were 
unable  to  understand  the  solemn  character  of  the  obligation 
and,  therefore,  could  not  be  expected  to  abide  by  it  in  later 
life.  Others  feared  that  if  the  immature  were  enrolled  the 
charge  of  coercion  would  be  brought  against  the  temperance 
forces.  The  opposition  would  be  able  to  accuse  them  of 
imposing  opinions  upon  minds  not  able  to  reach  a  rational 

os  Pa.  Temp.  Bee.,  April,  1835,  p.  14;  N.  Y.  Observer,  Jan.  17,  1829. 

Henry  Hall,  History  of  Auburn,  pp.  255-256.  This  developed  into 
the  Martha  Washington  societies. 

ro  Constitution  of  the  Female  Branch  of  the  Temperance  Beneficial 
Association  (Philadelphia,  1838). 

7i  Infra  pp.  215-217. 


ORGANIZING  FOR  VICTORY 


151 

decision.  Still  other  leaders  challenged  the  advisability  of 
swelling  the  ranks  with  recruits  who  might  desert  as  they 
grew  older.  Belief  in  the  old  adage  of  the  bent  twig,  how¬ 
ever,  was  strong  enough  to  make  a  majority  of  the  reformers 
eager  to  win  the  allegiance  of  children.  Through  the 
medium  of  Sunday  Schools,  many  boys  and  girls  above  the 
age  of  twelve  were  enrolled  in  young  people’s  temperance 
societies.72  As  these  groups  increased  in  number,  the  age 
limit  of  twelve  was  generally  adopted,  although  some  lo¬ 
calities  allowed  none  under  fourteen  to  sign  the  pledge.73 
Not  every  community  was  sufficiently  interested  in  the  chil¬ 
dren  to  organize  a  young  people’s  societ}^ ;  some  preferred 
to  have  the  youth  become  nominal  members  of  the  groups 
primarily  designed  to  express  the  conviction  of  their  parents. 
Where  children’s  societies  were  in  existence,  special  meetings 
were  arranged  at  which  programs  of  songs  and  recitations 
were  presented  by  the  youthful  volunteers.74  The  rhymed 
version  of  the  pledge,  widely  used  during  the  thirties,  took 
a  position  beyond  that  adopted  by  adults : 

This  little  band  do  with  our  hand 
The-  pledge  now  sign  to  drink  no  wine, 

Nor  brandy  red,  to  turn  our  head, 

Nor  whisky  hot  that  makes  the  sot, 

Nor  fiery  rum  to  turn  our  home 

Into  a  hell  where  none  could  dwell — 

Whence  peace  would  fly,  where  hope  would  die, 

And  love  expire  ’mid  such  a  fire; 

So  here  we  pledge  perpetual  hate 
To  all  that  can  intoxicate.75 

72  Boston  Recorder,  July  23,  1829;  N.  Y.  Evangelist,  Aug.  3,  1833. 

73  Journal  of  Humanity,  June  3,  1830,  p.  6;  Mass.  Spy,  March  21, 
1832;  Pa.  Temp.  Rec.,  February,  1836,  p.  11. 

7*  Journal  of  the  American  Temperance  Union,  July,  1837,  p.  112. 

7 5  Columbus  Democrat,  Aug.  24,  1839;  Clark,  op.  cit.,  44—45;  E.  T. 
Fairbanks,  The  Town  of  St.  Johnsbury,  Vt.,  p.  292. 


152  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

Although  many  in  “this  little  band”  enlisted  in  the  tem¬ 
perance  forces  under  the  guidance  of  their  parents,  some  had 
already  experienced  the  poverty  and  misery  which  too  often 
accompany  intemperance.  They  embodied  a  powerful  emo¬ 
tional  appeal,  which  remained  a  potential  force  until  used 
with  telling  effect  in  the  decade  of  the  forties. 

As  the  year  1835  drew  to  a  close,  the  reformers  felt 
confident  that  victory  was  well  within  their  grasp.  A  million 
men,  women  and  children  were  actively  engaged  in  promoting 
temperance  principles.  The  tone  of  public  opinion  in  regard 
to  the  use  of  ardent  spirits,  they  believed,  was  becoming  daily 
more  favourable  to  their  cause.  The  achievements  of  the 
five  years  just  past  loomed  up  before  them  in  more  impressive 
fashion  than  the  obstacles  which  remained  to  be  overcome. 
Enthusiasm  ran  high  and  found  conspicuous  outlet  in  a 
series  of  regularly  recurring  conventions.  There  were  city, 
county  and  state  conventions  with  their  schedules  of  speeches, 
reports,  resolutions  and  petitions.  In  every  state  the  dele¬ 
gates  from  town  and  village  societies  assembled  annually  and 
portrayed  in  terms  belonging  only  to  the  zealous  the  progress 
of  the  reform  in  their  respective  districts.76  With  few  ex¬ 
ceptions  these  reports  served  to  increase  the  rejoicing  at  the 
signs  of  success  apparent  on  all  sides.  But  had  the  en¬ 
thusiasts  carefully  analysed  the  situation,  they  would  have 
seen,  what  some  of  the  leaders  already  feared,  that  the 
advance  of  the  temperance  forces  would  be  halted  not  so 
much  by  opposition  or  indifference  as  by  dissension  within 
the  ranks. 

is  Georgia  Journal,  June  5,  1830,  June  9,  1831;  Ohio  Monitor,  Feb. 
24,  1834;  North  Carolina  Standard,  Jan.  23,  1835;  Anniversary  Report 
of  the  Pennsylvania  Temperance  Society  (1833)  ;  P.  T.  D.,  I,  343-345. 


CHAPTER  VIII 


DISSENSION  WITHIN  THE  RANKS 

The  United  States  Temperance  Union,  created  by  the 
Philadelphia  convention  in  1833,  won  no  victories  under  the 
leadership  of  General  Stephen  Van  Rensselaer.  This  was 
not  entirely  the  leader’s  fault;  his  associates,  earnest  re¬ 
formers  in  their  respective  states,  seem  to  have  been  little 
interested  in  a  national  organization  to  unify  the  work  of 
state  and  local  societies.  At  any  rate,  the  special  com¬ 
mittee  on  ways  and  means  of  effecting  centralized  control 
allowed  three  years  to  elapse  before  it  took  any  action. 
Then,  in  May,  1836,  it  issued  a  call  for  a  national  con¬ 
vention  of  societies  in  the  United  States  and  Canada  to  be 
held  on  the  fourth  of  the  following  August  in  Saratoga 
Springs,  New  York.  The  response  indicated  that  a  spirit 
of  unity  was  not  lacking.  Three  hundred  and  forty-eight 
delegates,  representing  nineteen  states  and  Upper  and  Lower 
Canada,  enjoyed  the  hospitality  of  the  New  York  State 
Temperance  Society  during  the  sessions.  Sentiment  in  the 
convention  strongly  favoured  an  enlargement  of  the  old 
Union  in  order  to  include  the  Canadas  and  any  other  part 
of  North  America  that  desired  to  co-operate.  Accordingly, 
a  plan  of  re-organization  was  worked  out,  the  name  being 
changed  from  United  States  to  American  Temperance  Union. 
Henceforth,  any  society  in  North  America  might  become 
auxiliary  to  the  Union.  As  a  final  step  the  official  personnel 
was  entirely  altered,  and  John  H.  Cocke  of  Virginia  was 
chosen  president.1 

iP.  T.  D.,  II,  13-14;  Journal,  January,  1837,  pp.  1-2;  Marsh,  op.  tit., 
44-45. 


153 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


154 

General  Cocke  was  quite  as  philanthropic  and  earnest  as 
his  predecessor.  His  career  had  been  one  of  constant  ac¬ 
tivity  in  many  of  the  religious  and  social  movements  of  his 
day.2  As  a  young  man,  he  had  promoted  Bible  and  tract 
societies  in  Virginia,  eventually  becoming  an  influential  and 
generous  member  of  the  American  Board  of  Commissioners 
for  Foreign  Missions.  Like  many  other  Virginia  slave¬ 
holders,  he  was  interested  in  the  work  of  the  American 
Colonization  Society  and  served  as  one  of  its  vice-presidents. 
Having  accepted  membership  in  the  American  Temperance 
Society  shortly  after  its  formation,  he  devoted  his  time  to 
promoting  the  reform  in  his  own  neighbourhood.  That  his 
efforts  were  not  in  vain  is  attested  by  the  high  rank  in 
temperance  work  early  attained  by  Fluvanna  County,  where 
his  estate  was  located.3  General  Cocke  was  fortunate  in 
his  associates  on  the  new  Union’s  executive  committee,  for 
the  convention  had  selected  men  who  had  distinguished  them¬ 
selves  for  energy  and  ability  in  their  respective  states.4 
As  chairman,  Edward  C.  Delavan  of  Albany  inspired  con¬ 
fidence  because  of  his  seven  successful  years  at  the  helm  of 
the  strongest  state  society  in  the  country.  He  had  for 
lieutenants  Joshua  W.  Leavitt,  editor  of  the  New  York 
Evangelist ;  5  John  Tappan,  charter  member  of  the  Massa¬ 
chusetts  Society  for  the  Suppression  of  Intemperance; 

2  Like  Van  Rensselaer,  John  H.  Cocke  was  a  landed  proprietor.  He 
had  served  as  general  commanding  the  Virginia  troops  during  the  war  of 
1812.  His  extensive  estate  in  Fluvanna  County  was  known  far  and  wide 
as  “Bremo.”  National  Cyclopedia  of  American  Biography,  IV,  181. 

3  Journal  of  Humanity,  files,  1831. 

♦The  honorary  vice-presidents  were  Matthew  Newkirk  of  Pennsyl¬ 
vania,  Samuel  Hubbard  of  Massachusetts,  Bishop  Stuart  of  Canada, 
Theodore  Frelinghuysen  of  New  Jersey,  Reuben  H.  Walworth  of  New 
York,  Governor  Lucas  of  Ohio,  and  ex-Governor  Dunlap  of  Maine. 
P.  T.  D„  II,  14. 

5  Leavitt,  like  many  other  temperance  advocates,  was  also  an  anti¬ 
slavery  enthusiast.  He  followed  Birney  rather  than  Garrison.  Under 
his  editorship  the  Evangelist  constantly  preached  total  abstinence  from 
all  that  intoxicates. 


DISSENSION  WITHIN  THE  RANKS  155 

Christian  Keener,  executive  secretary  in  Maryland;  John  T. 
Norton,  financier  of  the  Connecticut  society;  Isaac  Collins 
and  Isaac  S.  Lloyd,  efficient  agents  for  the  Pennsylvania 
state  society. 

Having  settled  without  difficulty  the  organization  and 
personnel  of  the  American  Temperance  Union,  the  con¬ 
vention  turned  to  a  more  troublesome  problem,  that  of 
stating  fundamental  policies.  Early  in  the  sessions  it  be¬ 
came  evident  that  those  in  favour  of  a  more  drastic  wording 
of  the  pledge  were  sufficiently  numerous  to  compel  acceptance 
of  their  views.  Justin  Edwards  and  Lyman  Beecher  led 
this  movement  for  an  obligation  that  would  bind  all  tem¬ 
perance  advocates  to  “total  abstinence  from  all  that  can 
intoxicate.”  Although  their  plan  to  place  fermented  liquors 
under  the  ban  met  with  the  approval  of  a  majority,  it  was 
not  accomplished  without  a  struggle.  Many  were  opposed  to 
abstinence  from  the  use  of  wine  because  they  believed  such 
action  would  result  in  a  disavowal  of  Scriptural  teachings  on 
the  subject.  Some  feared  that  the  term  intoxicants  might 
be  construed  to  include  malt  beverages,  the  use  of  which  did 
not  meet  with  their  disapproval.  There  were  others  in  the 
convention  who  sympathized  with  the  more  enthusiastic  re¬ 
formers,  but  believed  that  it  was  wfise  to  proceed  slowly.6 
Professor  Alonzo  Potter  of  Union  College  and  Dr.  Levi  H. 
Reese  of  Baltimore  were  leaders  of  the  group  that  counselled 
caution,  lest  the  adoption  of  a  radical  pledge  should  drive 
the  conservatives  into  open  hostility.7  As  a  result  of  this 
long,  and  sometimes  heated,  discussion  came  a  resolution 
worded  to  placate  the  moderates : 

s  P.  T.  D.,  II,  21,  26;  Marsh,  op.  cit.,  pp.  4Ar-45. 

r  Professor  Potter  later  became  a  bishop  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal 
Church.  His  support  of  the  temperance  cause  was  sincere,  but  he  be¬ 
lieved  that  extremists  should  be  restrained,  lest  they  injure  the  cause 
by  their  excessive  enthusiasm.  M.  A.  De  Wolfe  Howe,  Memoirs  of  the 
Life  and  Services  of  the  Rt.  Rev.  Alonzo  Potter,  pp.  74-75. 


156  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

That  as  abstinence  from  the  use,  as  a  beverage,  of  intoxicating 
liquor,  is  the  only  course  in  which  it  can  be  rationally  expected 
that  intemperate  persons  can  ever  be  permanently  reformed, 
and  as  the  example  and  kind  moral  influence  of  the  temperate  is 
the  grand  means  of  leading  the  intemperate  to  adopt  and  pursue 
a  course  so  essential  to  their  present  and  future  good,  the  more 
extensively  this  course  is  adopted  by  the  moral  part  of  the 
community,  the  more  useful,  in  our  view,  will  be  the  influence  of 
their  example,  and  the  more  speedy  and  universal  the  triumph 
of  the  temperance  cause.8 

As  a  further  concession  to  the  minority,  the  conciliatory 
spirit  of  the  assemblage  was  embodied  in  another  resolu¬ 
tion: 

That,  in  maintaining  the  propriety  and  necessity  of  total 
abstinence  from  all  that  can  intoxicate,  this  convention  make  no 
decision  as  to  the  grounds  of  our  united  action,  because  we 
believe  that  our  harmony  and  efficiency  in  the  great  cause  of 
temperance  forbid  us  to  conflict,  unnecessarily,  with  those  who 
differ  from  us  in  theory,  while  we  are  united  in  practice.9 

Thus,  in  language  marvellously  obscure,  was  a  bid  made  for 
the  support  of  those  who,  finding  no  fault  with  the  use  of 
wine,  were  willing  to  abstain,  if  it  was  deemed  expedient. 

The  action  of  the  Saratoga  convention  was  no  great  sur¬ 
prise  to  informed  observers.  Although  a  majority  of  so¬ 
cieties,  previous  to  1836,  carefully  distinguished  between 
distilled  spirits  and  other  beverages  containing  alcohol, 
there  had  been  opposition  in  many  quarters  to  such  a  dis¬ 
tinction.  While  some  insisted  that  wine  and  beer,  since  they 
were  seldom  used  to  excess,  were  important  instruments  in 
suppressing  intemperance,  others  were  convinced  that  the 
use  of  fermented  beverages  was  but  the  mild  beginning  of  a 

«  P.  T.  D.,  II,  25. 

» Ibid.,  26. 


DISSENSION  WITHIN  THE  RANKS  157 
drunkard’s  career.10  The  latter  view  was  constantly  pre¬ 
sented  to  readers  of  the  Journal  of  Humanity  with  the  result 
that  many  local  societies,  ignoring  the  attitude  of  their 
state  organization,  adopted  constitutions  which  enjoined 
abstinence  not  only  from  ardent  spirits,  but  also  from  wine, 
cider  and  beer.  As  early  as  1829  this  was  done  in  Falls 
Spring,  Virginia,  and  within  four  years  the  new  type  of 
society  had  a  large  following  in  many  sections.11  Ohio 
reported  seventeen  groups  whose  pledge  forbade  the  use  of 
wine,  except  as  medicine  or  for  sacramental  purposes.  At 
the  same  time  the  most  successful  societies  in  Vermont  were 
those  that  directed  their  pledge  against  “all  that  can  in¬ 
toxicate.”  Conventions  in  other  states  discussed  the  wine 
question,  but  usually  failed  to  take  action  because  of  a 
pronounced  difference  of  opinion.12 

So  long  as  the  radical  groups  felt  that  they  were  out¬ 
numbered,  they  tactfully  refrained  from  any  attempt  to 
force  the  issue.  A  rapid  increase  in  their  ranks,  however, 
convinced  them  in  the  autumn  of  1836  that  they  were  no 
longer  a  minority  faction.  During  1835  and  the  first  six 
months  of  1836  state  conventions  in  New  Hampshire,  New 

Documents  and  Records  of  the  Massachusetts  Temperance  Society, 
November  5,  1827;  Journal  of  Humanity,  May  27,  1829;  Georgia  Journal, 
May  22,  1830.  The  editor  of  the  Georgia  Journal  spoke  one  word  in 
support  of  temperance  and  two  against  the  tariff,  when  he  insisted  that 
heavy  duties  upon  imported  liquors  were  partially  responsible  for  the 
growth  of  intemperance.  The  imposition  of  the  “American  System,” 
he  asserted,  had  placed  comparatively  harmless  beverages  of  European 
production  beyond  the  reach  of  the  poor,  compelling  them  to  use  such 
“villainous  stuff”  as  Yankee  rum  and  Kentucky  “blue  ruin.”  Repeal 
of  the  duties  on  madeira,  sherry,  port  and  other  wines  would  greatly 
strengthen  the  temperance  cause,  for  it  was  well  known  that  drunken¬ 
ness  was  uncommon  in  wine-drinking  countries.  See  Journal,  June  5, 
July  3,  1830. 

1 1  Mass.  Spy,  July  7,  1830,  May  11,  1831;  Boston  Recorder,  July  30, 
1829. 

12  Am.  Quart.  Temp.  Mag.,  May,  1833,  p.  174;  Temp.  Rec.,  August  6, 
1833,  p.  47,  February  4,  1834,  p.  97;  Mass.  Spy,  July  3,  1833;  The  Ga- 
lenian  (Galena,  Ill.),  March  21,  1834. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


158 

Jersey  and  Pennsylvania  had  substituted  intoxicating  liquors 
for  ardent  spirits  in  the  pledge  and  had  urged  all  auxiliaries 
to  do  likewise.13  The  Temperance  Recorder  in  accordance 
with  instructions  from  the  New  York  State  Temperance  So¬ 
ciety  had  come  out  definitely  in  favour  of  total  abstinence 
from  all  alcoholic  beverages.  In  explaining  the  new  policy 
the  editor  wrote : 

Our  views  with  regard  to  pure  wine  are,  that  the  Bible  sanc¬ 
tions  its  moderate  use — that  there  can  be  no  immorality  in  such 
use,  under  certain  circumstances ;  but  in  our  present  condition 
with  the  fact  that  pure  wine  is  fatal  to  the  recovery  of  the 
drunkard,  because  it  intoxicates,  often  forms  the  appetite  for 
stronger  drinks  in  the  temperate,  and  its  use  by  the  rich  hinders 
the  poor  from  uniting  with  temperance  societies— that  all,  or 
nearly  all  the  wine  in  this  country,  is  a  most  vile  compound; 
these  are  the  reasons  why  we  urge  abstinence  from  all  wine.14 

Other  temperance  periodicals  had  followed  the  course  of  the 
Recorder,  till  only  a  few  clung  to  the  doctrine  that  the  use 
of  wine  was  not  contrary  to  temperance  principles.15  Then 
it  was  that  the  teetotalers,  as  they  were  called,  launched  their 
campaign  at  the  Saratoga  convention  and  won  a  vote  of 
confidence  from  the  national  organization.16 

The  success  at  Saratoga  was  but  a  skirmish  preliminary 
to  a  prolonged  struggle  in  almost  every  city  and  hamlet 
throughout  the  country.  Whether  the  temperance  forces 
would  support  the  American  Temperance  Union  in  its  new 
program  depended  not  so  much  on  the  decision  of  a  national 
convention  as  on  the  attitude  of  hundreds  of  local  societies. 

is  Temp.  Bee.,  April,  1835,  p.  20,  March,  1836,  p.  3;  Pa.  Temp.  Bee., 
February,  1836,  p.  15,  April,  1836,  p.  28;  P.  T.  D.,  I,  455,  474. 

14  P.  T.  D.,  I,  514;  Temp.  Bee.,  March,  1835,  p.  10;  April,  1835,  p.  17. 

is  Pa.  Temp.  Bee.,  October,  1835,  p.  60. 

is  The  name,  teetotaler,  seems  to  have  been  used  first  in  Scotland, 
where  it  designated  those  temperance  advocates  who  objected  to  the 
use  of  wine.  When  they  signed  their  names  to  the  pledge  they  usually 
added  the  initials  T.  A.,  standing  for  total  abstinence. 


DISSENSION  WITHIN  THE  RANKS  159 

During  the  autumn  of  1836  the  Union’s  executive  committee 
decided  to  carry  on  its  campaign  through  the  columns  of  a 
new  periodical  devoted  exclusively  to  the  interests  of  the 
national  organization.17  Edward  C.  Delavan,  as  he  had  so 
often  done  when  the  treasury  was  low,  provided  the  necessary 
funds,  and  the  initial  number  of  the  Journal  of  the  American 
Temperance  Union  appeared  in  Philadelphia  in  January, 
1837,  carrying  at  the  head  of  its  first  column  a  revised 
pledge : 

We,  the  undersigned,  do  agree  that  we  will  not  use  intoxicating 
liquors  as  a  beverage,  nor  traffic  in  them ;  that  we  will  not  provide 
them  as  entertainment  or  for  persons  in  our  employment;  and 
that,  in  all  suitable  ways,  we  will  discountenance  their  use 
throughout  the  community.18 


In  its  editorials  the  Journal  assailed  those  reformers  who 
found  no  sin  in  the  moderate  use  of  good  wines.  Their  ex¬ 
ample,  so  the  editor  reasoned,  would  in  the  long  run  betray 
the  temperance  cause  in  the  camp  of  its  friends. 

There  was  now  an  opportunity  to  test  sentiment  on  this 
point.  Every  society  which  affiliated  with  the  Union  became 
ipso  facto  a  supporter  of  the  new  pledge.  Conservative 
groups  which  refused  to  become  auxiliaries  were  not  con¬ 
sidered  as  active  temperance  organizations  by  the  societies 

it  Marsh,  op.  cit.,  pp.  45-46.  The  intention  of  the  committee  was 
that  E.  C.  Delavan  should  become  editor  of  the  Journal  and  executive 
secretary  of  the  Union,  but  he  declined  the  honour  and  John  Marsh  was 
chosen  in  his  stead.  Eight  years  before  Marsh  had  resigned  his  pastor¬ 
ate  in  Connecticut  to  become  an  agent  of  the  American  Temperance 
Society,  in  which  work  he  was  signally  successful.  From  Boston  he 
went  to  Philadelphia  where  he  accepted  a  position  as  executive  secre¬ 
tary  of  the  Pennsylvania  Temperance  Society  and  made  it  one  of  the 
oustanding  state  organizations.  Through  his  temperance  addresses  and 
pamphlets  he  became  widely  known  among  those  interested  in  the  re¬ 
form. 

1S  Journal  of  the  American  Temperance  Union,  January,  1837,  p.  1. 
(To  be  cited  Journal.) 


160  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

in  the  Union.  At  first  reports  from  the  executive  committee 
were  encouraging,  as  society  after  society  placed  wines  and 
cider,  and  occasionally  beer,  under  the  ban.19  The  ap¬ 
parently  widespread  sentiment  in  favour  of  the  new  pledge, 
however,  was  not  a  fair  indication  of  the  real  state  of  affairs. 
Although  in  most  local  groups  a  majority  was  willing  to 
push  forward  a  campaign  against  the  use  of  mild  intoxicants, 
it  sometimes  happened  that  only  a  determined  minority  was 
so  inclined.  Then,  too,  dissension  within  the  ranks  was  not 
so  evident  in  the  refusal  of  societies  to  join  the  Union,  as 
in  individual  secessions  from  societies  which  did  become 
auxiliaries.  In  Maine,  the  conservatives  controlled  a  state 
convention  in  1837,  whereupon  the  radicals  seceded  and 
formed  an  organization  of  their  own  known  as  the  Maine 
Temperance  Union,  thus  dividing  the  temperance  forces  in 
the  state  into  two  hostile  camps.20  The  serious  character 
of  such  divisions  and  the  effect  on  the  progress  of  reform 
served  to  discourage  many  faithful  leaders.  In  September, 
1836,  Edward  C.  Delavan  resigned  as  chairman  of  the  New 
York  state  society,  because  he  believed  that  his  former 
associates  were  not  ready  to  follow  him  in  a  vigorous  attack 
on  vendors  and  users  of  wine.  In  later  years  he  confessed 
that  at  the  time  he  was  depressed  by  the  defection  of  his 
friends,  not  more  than  one-third  of  whom  agreed  with  his 
views  on  the  question.  He  estimated  that  nearly  2,000 
societies  failed  to  adopt  the  new  pledge,  some  abandoning  the 
cause  entirely.21  Of  the  situation  in  Ohio  Governor  Trimble 
wrote : 

Annual  Report  of  the  New  York  Young  Men’s  Total  Abstinence 
Society  (1837);  Constitution  of  the  Providence  County  Temperance 
Society  (1838);  P.  T.  D. ,  II,  42-46;  Clark,  op.  cit.,  pp.  34-35,  29.  Ex¬ 
act  definition  of  intoxicating  was  not  attempted  by  the  Union. 

2°  Dow,  Reminiscences,  pp.  231-235.  In  Georgia  the  division  termi¬ 
nated  the  existence  of  the  old  state  society.  Scomp,  King  Alcohol  in 
the  Realm  of  King  Cotton,  p.  319. 

2i  See  letter  of  E.  C.  Delavan  in  P.  T.  Winskill,  The  Temperance  Move¬ 
ment  and  Its  Workers,  II,  205—206. 


DISSENSION  WITHIN  THE  RANKS  161 

The  temperance  cause  is  on  the  advance  in  this  place  since 
the  adoption,  by  a  small  portion  of  the  old  society,  of  the  pledge 
of  total  abstinence  from  all  drinks,  as  a  beverage,  that  ■will 
intoxicate.  We  began  a  few  weeks  since  with  48  members,  and 
increased  to  100,  and  hope  to  double  again  at  our  next  meeting. 
The  wine,  cider  and  beer  drinkers  contend  zealously  for  the  use 
of  these  articles,  even  should  habitual  drunkenness  occasionally 
follow.  The  societies  that  have  adopted  the  total  abstinence 
pledge  are  active  and  increasing  their  numbers.  Those  societies 
that  go  upon  the  principle  that  distilled  spirits  alone  should  be 
excluded,  are  dragging  heavily,  and  I  think  retrograding,  rather 
than  advancing.22 

Conditions  in  Ohio  were  typical.23  Advocates  of  the  new 
pledge  were  slowly  winning  ground,  but  their  victories  had 
been  costly  ones.  In  New  York,  for  example,  the  statistics 
for  the  years  1836  and  1839  told  the  story.  In  1836  the 
state  society  reported  almost  1300  auxiliaries  with  a  mem¬ 
bership  of  229,000,  while  three  years  later  1178  societies 
enrolled  131,000  members  who  had  signed  the  comprehensive 
pledge.24  As  serious  as  the  loss  of  members  was  the  fact 
that  many  generous  contributors  to  temperance  funds  were 
not  willing  to  give  financial  support  to  an  organization  that 
barred  the  use  of  wine.25  Handicapped  by  lack  of  resources, 

22  Journal,  March,  1837,  p.  39. 

23  As  many  of  the  active  leaders  in  Ohio  and  elsewhere  supported 
the  new  pledge,  old  societies  frequently  were  left  leaderless,  a  loss 
which  hastened  their  dissolution.  Scomp,  op.  cit.,  319-320. 

24  p.  T.  D.,  II,  126. 

25  No  state  society  before  1840  had  any  definite  plan  for  the  supply 
of  its  treasury.  Voluntary  subscriptions  and  collections  taken  at  meet¬ 
ings  furnished  the  bulk  of  the  funds.  Large  donations  were  made  to 
the  cause  at  frequent  intervals  by  such  prominent  business  men  as 
John  and  Arthur  Tappan,  Stephen  Van  Rensselaer,  John  Jacob  Astor, 
Peter  Remsen,  Edward  Delavan,  John  H.  Cocke  and  Henry  Dwight. 
As  donations  declined  when  the  wine  controversy  reached  its  height, 
many  societies  resorted  to  the  assessment  of  dues.  Mass.  Spy,  June 
14,  1835;  P.  T.  D.,  II,  29;  Charles  Jewett,  The  Temperance  Cause,  Past, 
Present  and  Future,  pp.  15-28. 


162  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

the  radicals  were  further  embarrassed  bj  attacks  from  the 
moderates,  who  forgot  the  real  enemy  in  their  desire  to  hold 
the  reform  within  reasonable  limits.  In  many  sections 
the  moderates  were  so  numerous  that  for  a  time  they  turned 
attention  from  intemperance  and  its  remedy  to  a  considera¬ 
tion  of  the  merits  of  the  juice  of  the  grape. 

A  bitter  pamphlet  warfare  ensued  over  the  wine  question, 
each  faction  claiming  for  its  views  the  stamp  of  authority. 
In  its  early  stages  the  controversy  revolved  about  the  ques¬ 
tion  of  whether  the  reformers  had  been  basing  their  policy  on 
a  false  premise.  It  had  been  generally  assumed  that  Dr. 
Benjamin  Rush  was  correct  when  he  recommended  the  use 
of  beer  and  light  wines  as  a  corrective  of  intemperance.  His 
theory,  modified  slightly  by  those  who  came  after  him, 
stressed  the  importance  of  breaking  down  mankind’s  fondness 
for  distilled  spirits  by  substituting  milder  beverages.  The 
result,  he  believed,  would  be  abstinence  from  the  use  of  the 
worst  form  of  intoxicants  and  consequent  escape  from  the 
physical  and  mental  evils  of  excessive  drinking.  The  re¬ 
formers  of  the  first  three  decades  of  the  nineteenth  century 
interpreted  this  to  mean  entire  abstinence  from  ardent  spirits 
and  temperate  use  of  fermented  and  malt  liquors.  Sceptics 
there  were,  however,  who  challenged  the  theory,  pointing 
out  that  the  “specific  evil”  in  ardent  spirits,  alcohol,  was  also 
present  in  fermented  wine.26  They  insisted  that,  since  in¬ 
toxication  resulted  from  the  use  of  wines  in  the  same  fashion 
as  from  the  use  of  distilled  liquors,  the  effect  on  the  human 
mind  and  body  was  as  harmful  in  one  case  as  in  the  other. 
No  less  sincere  friends  of  temperance,  however,  cited  the 
sobriety  of  European  wine-producing  countries  as  evidence 

26  L.  M.  Sargent,  Letter  to  Rev.  Caleb  Stetson,  p.  25.  Stetson  pub¬ 
lished  an  article  in  the  Christian  Examiner,  March,  1836,  in  which  he 
lamented  the  tendency  of  some  reformers  to  break  down  the  distinction 
between  distilled  and  fermented  liquors.  Sargent’s  answer  denied  that 
the  temperance  forces  could  consistently  make  a  distinction  which  rested 
upon  ignorance  of  the  alcoholic  content  of  wine. 


DISSENSION  WITHIN  THE  RANKS  163 
that  intemperance  in  the  United  States  was  traceable  to  the 
American’s  use  of  distilled  rather  than  fermented  beverages. 
This  group'  maintained  that  any  nation  could  be  made  sober, 
if  its  citizens  would  rely  upon  light  wines  and  beer  for  their 
stimulants.  They  saw  nothing  but  disaster  for  the  tem¬ 
perance  cause  in  the  attempt  to  place  mild  liquors  under 
the  ban.27  Their  fears  were  well  expressed  by  a  cor¬ 
respondent  in  the  American  Quarterly  Temperance  Maga¬ 
zine: 

By  admitting  wine,  beer  and  cider  into  the  temperance  pledge, 
we  are  endeavoring  to  make  the  use  of  them  as  disreputable 
as  the  use  of  ardent  spirits.  We  are  endeavoring  to  make  the 
sin  of  drinking  cider  as  great  as  the  sin  of  drinking  whiskey. 
The  intent  is  to  elevate  the  offense  of  cider  drinking,  beer  drink¬ 
ing  and  wine  drinking  up  to  the  enormity  of  dram  drinking.  .  .  . 
This  view  is  fallacious.  Instead  of  elevating  the  offense  of  cider 
drinking,  it  will  depress  the  offense  of  dram  drinking  down  to 
the  level  of  cider  drinking.  It  dilutes  the  temperance  pledge. 
The  moment  the  sin  of  dram  drinking  shall  be  deemed  no  greater 
than  the  sin  of  cider  drinking,  the  whole  fabric  will  be  in  ruins.28 

Of  those  who  dissented  fi*om  the  foregoing  opinion,  none 
were  more  energetic  in  placing  their  conclusions  before  the 
public  than  Edward  C.  Delavan,  Lucius  M.  Sargent  and  Dr. 
Eliphalet  Nott.  Before  he  became  interested  in  temperance 
work,  Delavan  had  been  a  connoisseur  of  choice  wines. 
Having  sacrificed  the  contents  of  his  well  stocked  cellar  for 
conscience’  sake,  he  began  to  investigate  the  wine  situation 
with  hope  of  securing  information  which  would  persuade  his 
friends  to  follow  his  example.  From  conversations  with 
wine  importers  and  vintners,  from  personal  observation  and 
from  the  reports  of  expert  chemists  he  collected  a  mass  of 
material  pertaining  to  the  adulteration  of  fermented  liquors. 
He  published  this  information  periodically  in  the  Temperance 

27  Mass.  Spy,  April  4,  25,  1832. 

28  Am.  Quart.  Temp.  Mag.,  August,  1834,  p.  75. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


164 

Recorder  and  distributed  some  of  it  in  pamphlet  form.  The 
evidence  tended  to  show  that  most  wines  used  in  the  United 
States  were  either  vile  adulterations  or  else  cheap  imitations 
of  European  vintages.  Hence,  any  argument  that  wines 
were  harmless,  Delavan  maintained,  was  inapplicable  to  the 
American  situation,  since  only  the  wealthy  received  pure 
stocks.  Commercial  brands  were  heavily  freighted  with  dis¬ 
tilled  spirits  and  drugs  before  they  were  sold  and  were, 
therefore,  more  to  be  shunned  than  unadulterated  whisky.29 
There  could  be  no  defence  for  traffic  in  such  concoctions. 
Sargent,  as  well  as  Delavan,  was  interested  in  the  terrible 
frauds  perpetrated  by  wine-dealers,  but  be  was  primarily 
anxious  to  refute  the  widely  accepted  idea  that  European 
wine  countries  were  singularly  temperate.  Basing  his  argu¬ 
ment  on  observations  of  American  travellers,  he  sought  to 
convince  his  readers  that  fermented  liquors  caused  as  much 
intemperance  as  rum,  brandy  or  whisky.  He  further  in¬ 
sisted  that  not  a  single  drunkard  would  ever  be  reformed  by 
substituting  one  form  of  alcohol  for  another.  His  conclu¬ 
sion  was  that  no  great  decrease  in  intemperance  would  be 
effected  so  long  as  temperance  societies  tolerated  wine-drink¬ 
ing  among  their  members.  The  distinction  between  alcohol 
produced  by  fermentation  and  that  produced  by  distillation 
seemed  to  him  absurd,  for  in  both  cases  the  poison  had  the 
same  effect.30 

Dr.  Nott’s  chief  contribution  to  this  controversy  was 
contained  in  his  ten  lectures  delivered  to  students  at  Union 
College  in  the  winter  of  1838—1839.  His  central  theme  was 
an  exposition  of  Scriptural  injunctions  in  regard  to  the  use 

29  Mr.  Delavan  republished  the  bulk  of  this  material  in  a  pamphlet 
in  1850.  See  E.  C.  Delavan,  Adulterations  of  Liquors.  One  unusual 
example  of  adulteration  for  which  the  author  vouched  must  have  tested 
the  credulity  of  his  readers.  He  stated  that  the  famous  “nutty  flavor” 
of  madeira  was  produced  by  dissolving  a  bag  of  roaches  in  the  liquor. 

30  L.  M.  Sargent,  op.  cit.,  pp.  10-25.  For  the  same  views  see  Gerrit 
Smith's  argument  in  Correspondence  on  the  Principles  of  Bight  Reason <- 
ing  Applicable  to  Temperance. 


DISSENSION  WITHIN  THE  RANKS 


165 

of  fermented  liquors.  In  the  light  of  careful  scholarship  he 
attempted  to  explain  several  points  which  had  long  bothered 
temperance  workers.  Did  the  Old  Testament  specifically 
approve  the  use  of  wine?  Were  the  teachings  of  the  New 
Testament  in  accord  with  those  of  the  Old  on  this  subject? 
Were  temperance  advocates  who  refused  to  give  up  the  use 
of  wine  because  of  religious  scruples  justified?  31  Dr.  Nott 
believed  that  a  study  of  the  Scriptures  would  correct  many 
popular  misconceptions.  His  own  position  could  be  briefly 
stated.32  Although  the  Bible  authorized  the  use  of  certain 
wines  in  Palestine,  there  were  other  wines,  even  in  Palestine, 
the  use  of  which  was  forbidden.  Nine  words  in  the  Hebrew 
of  the  Old  Testament  had  been  translated  into  English  by 
the  single  word,  wine.  But  their  various  meanings  in  the 
original  text,  Dr.  Nott  maintained,  could  not  be  adequately 
expressed  by  any  such  inaccurate  translation.  His  study  of 
different  usages  enabled  him  to  assure  his  readers  that  the 
use  of  intoxicating  liquors  seldom  received  Scriptural  com¬ 
mendation.  The  wine  repeatedly  approved  by  the  sacred 
writers  was  the  juice  of  the  grape  in  its  natural  state. 
Any  fermented  fruit  juice  was  denounced  as  a  “mocker.” 
It  was  armed  with  the  serpent’s  bite  and  the  adder’s  sting.33 

si  Many  friends  of  temperance  had  insisted  that  the  Bible  expressly 
recommended  the  moderate  use  of  wine.  This  they  considered  an  in¬ 
junction  which  it  was  not  for  them  to  question.  See  Gustavus  F.  Davis, 
A  Sermon  delivered  in  the  Baptist  Meeting  House,  Hartford,  May  25, 
1881. 

32  Dr.  Nott  was  not  the  first  commentator  to  make  this  point.  See 
William  Shelton,  An  Address  before  the  Citizens  of  Buffalo,  pp.  6-8; 
Edward  Hitchcock,  An  Essay  on  Alcoholic  and  Narcotic  Substances. 

33  Eliphalet  Nott,  Lectures  on  Temperance,  75-121.  Nott  maintained 
that  some  alcohol  was  present  in  the  unfermented  juice  of  the  grape. 
He  also  believed  that  the  Scriptures  approved  in  a  few  instances  the 
use  of  slightly  fermented  wine.  These  beverages  according  to  his  con¬ 
tention  were  not  intoxicating.  This  fine  distinction  was  challenged  by 
Dr.  R.  D.  Mussey,  Moses  Stuart  of  Andover  and  E.  C.  Delavan.  The 
ensuing  controversy  was  long  but  friendly.  Dr.  Nott  finally  capitulating 
to  his  friends  and  agreeing  that  the  Scriptures  placed  all  fermented 
beverages  under  the  ban.  Marsh,  op.  cit.,  166-170. 


166  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

The  wine  served  at  the  famous  marriage  feast  in  Cana  of 
Galilee  was  unfermented,  and  it  was  a  similar  bever¬ 
age  that  Paul  recommended  to  Timothy  for  his  “stomach’s 
sake.”  Few  Syrian  wines  were  of  a  sort  with  the  fer¬ 
mented  mixtures  commonly  used  by  Europeans  and  Amer¬ 
icans.34 

The  appeal  to  the  Scriptures  was  not  ended  by  Dr.  Nott’s 
exhaustive  exposition.  For  ten  years  the  controversy 
raged  within  the  temperance  ranks,  fuel  being  added  occa¬ 
sionally  in  the  form  of  spirited  arguments  from  outsiders. 
The  radicals  viewed  such  attacks  on  the  reform  as  that  of 
Bishop  Hopkins  with  disdain.  They  explained  it  as  an  in¬ 
dication  that  “fashionable,  wealthy,  wine-drinking  congre¬ 
gations”  in  the  Episcopal  Church  were  displeased  with  total 
abstinence  and  propaganda  in  its  favour.35  Conservatives, 
on  the  other  hand,  charged  radical  leaders  with  betraying 
the  temperance  movement  to  its  foes.  The  whole  discussion 
of  the  wine  question  had  been  injected  bv  those  who  desired  to 
engender  strife  and  start  a  factional  quarrel.  It  was  a 
clever  plot  to  wreck  the  reform  upon  the  rocks  of  internal 
dissension.  In  order  to  quiet  the  fears  of  the  conservatives 
and  meet  attacks  from  outsiders  who  were  making  capital  out 
of  the  controversy,  the  radicals  spent  considerable  time 
and  money  in  explaining  their  views.  The  most  damaging 
charge  against  them  was  that  they  were  trying  to  interfere 
with  the  use  of  wine  for  sacramental  purposes.  This  they 
denied,  insisting  that  their  espousal  of  total  abstinence  did 
not  force  them  to  make  a  decision  in  regard  to  sacramental 
wine,  since  that  more  properly  belonged  to  the  deliberation  of 
ecclesiastical  bodies.  Although  there  was  a  case  against 
the  use  of  intoxicants,  for  evidence  indicated  that  the  early 
Christian  Church  used  unfermented  beverages  in  celebrating 

34  Nott,  Lectures  on  Temperance,  pp.  161-177. 

35  Supra,  pp.  120-121;  also  see  Reply  to  Bishop  Hopkins’  Attack,  By 
An  Episcopalian,  p.  9. 


DISSENSION  WITHIN  THE  RANKS  167 
the  Lord’s  Supper,  it  was  the  intention  of  the  reformers  to 
avoid  a  controversy  on  this  point.36 

But  such  forbearance  was  not  for  long.  Before  1840 
aggressive  leaders  were  convinced  that  they  had  made  a  mis¬ 
take  by  side-stepping  the  “communion  question.”  Their 
failure  to  take  a  definite  stand  seemed  to  indicate  that  they 
feared  a  majority  of  church  members  would  oppose  them. 
Seeking  to  rectify  this  tactical  error,  they  began  a  campaign 
to  persuade  ecclesiastical  governing  bodies  to  modify  their 
eucharistic  regulations.  In  1841  a  quarterly  journal,  The 
Enquirer,  was  established  at  Albany  for  the  purpose  of 
keeping  the  question  before  the  public.37  In  its  columns  ap¬ 
peared  opinions  by  leading  clergymen  in  different  denomina¬ 
tions.  While  all  agreed  that  every  church  should  be  urged 
to  study  the  practice  of  the  early  Christian  Church,  at  least 
half  the  correspondents  were  opposed  to  any  propaganda 
which  might  give  colour  to  the  charge  that  temperance  re¬ 
formers  were  attempting  to  dictate  the  kind  of  wine  to  be 
used  in  the  celebration  of  the  Lord’s  Supper.  Some  de¬ 
plored  all  discussion  of  the  matter,  because  it  would  inevit¬ 
ably  involve  the  disputants  in  a  larger  controversy  over  the 
right  of  private  judgment  in  the  interpretation  of  the 
Scriptures.  Evidently  supporters  of  the  Enquirer  thought 
their  efforts  were  not  sufficiently  rewarded,  for  in  1843  they 
abandoned  their  original  policy  and  devoted  the  columns  of 
the  journal  to  the  pathology  of  intemperance.38  Other 

36  Temp.  Rec.,  August,  1835;  Enquirer,  December,  1841,  p.  18. 

37  Funds  for  the  Enquirer  were  supplied  by  E.  C.  Delavan  and  a  few 
friends.  The  editorial  work  was  under  Delavan’s  supervision.  En¬ 
quirer,  December,  1841. 

38  It  is  impossible  to  determine  just  how  much  this  controversy  af¬ 
fected  the  practice  of  Protestant  denominations.  Some  congregations 
adopted  resolutions  against  the  use  of  fermented  wine  at  communion, 
but  the  majority  seem  to  have  continued  to  use  whatever  wine  was 
available,  regardless  of  its  alcoholic  content.  N.  Y.  Tribune,  August 
11,  1841;  Enquirer,  December,  1842. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


168 

temperance  publications  failed  to  take  up  the  work,  no  doubt 
fearing  the  consequences  of  forcing  the  issue.39 

While  these  controversies  were  threatening  the  unity  of  the 
temperance  forces,  another  problem  was  responsible  for  ad¬ 
ditional  discord.  The  national  convention  at  Philadelphia 
in  1833  had  condemned  the  traffic  in  ardent  spirits  and 
pointed  out  iniquities  in  the  system  under  which  liquor 
dealers  were  prospering.  Though  public  control  of  the 
liquor  trade,  definitely  established  during  the  colonial  period, 
had  been  put  into  effect  in  every  state,  there  were  many  ob¬ 
jections  to  the  manner  in  which  the  control  was  exercised. 
The  licensing  system  seemed  far  from  an  ideal  solution. 
Some  counselled  a  more  vigorous  enforcement  of  existing 
statutes,  while  others  demanded  that  no  governmental  sanc¬ 
tion  be  given  to  an  immoral  business.  During  the  decade  of 
the  thirties  the  statutes  generally  provided  that  spirituous 
and  fermented  liquors  might  be  sold  in  two  types  of  estab¬ 
lishment,  in  inns  and  taverns  furnishing  accommodations  for 
man  and  beast,  or  in  groceries,  apothecary  shops  and  victu¬ 
alling  houses.  The  latter  were  forbidden  to  permit  tippling 
on  the  premises.40  In  practice  these  limitations  were  fre¬ 
quently  ignored.  Retailers  who  made  no  pretence  to  ac¬ 
commodate  the  travelling  public  secured  licences  as  reputable 
inn-holders  and  tavern-keepers.  Others  got  around  the  regu¬ 
lations  by  taking  out  grocery  licences  and  then  converting 
their  establishments  into  grog-shops  of  a  low  order.  Chi- 

39  Temperance  publications,  however,  continued  to  present  evidence 
to  show  that  the  Bible  did  not  place  the  stamp  of  approval  upon  the 
use  of  the  intoxicants  in  any  form.  See  Moses  Stuart,  Scriptural  View 
of  the  Wine  Question,  pp.  54—56. 

*0  Convenient  summaries  of  licence  laws  for  various  localities  will  be 
found  in  the  following:  Essex  Register  (Salem,  Mass.),  July  4,  1820; 
Mass.  Spy,  June  22,  1831;  Caleb  Ticknor,  Prize  Address  to  the  Honor¬ 
able  Corporation  of  the  City  of  New  York  (1834);  J.  H.  Stinness, 
Rhode  Island  Legislation  against  Strong  Drink,  pp.  28—29;  E.  O.  Randall 
and  D.  J.  Ryan,  History  of  Ohio,  IV,  510—517. 


DISSENSION  WITHIN  THE  RANKS 


169 

canery  in  granting  licences  and  violations  of  the  laws  were  so 
frequent  that  in  the  cities  grog-shops  and  tippling-houses, 
forerunners  of  the  American  saloon,  were  the  rule  rather  than 
the  exception.41  Yet  none  of  them  could  have  kept  their 
doors  open  a  day  had  the  laws  been  strictly  enforced. 

While  this  situation  caused  some  reformers  to  demand 
its  immediate  remedy  through  legislation,  many  were  in¬ 
clined  to  ignore  the  liquor  traffic  entirely.  Their  concern 
was  with  the  consumer  not  the  purveyor  of  intoxicants. 
Alteration  of  existing  statutes  was  far  from  the  purpose 
of  editors  of  the  Journal  of  Humanity  as  is  evident  from  the 
following  statements : 

The  American  Temperance  Society,  it  seems  to  us,  stands 
pledged  to  the  public  fully,  and  we  trust  irrevocably,  never  to 
make  any  appeal  to  legislators  or  officers  of  the  law,  for  the  aid 
of  authority  in  changing  the  habits  of  any  class  of  their  fellow 
citizens.  Its  appeal  is  to  the  people.42 

In  regard  to  methods  to  be  followed  in  the  work  of  reform 
they  were  equally  explicit : 

Nothing  can  be  more  injudicious  than  an  appeal  to  the  civil 
power  by  a  temperance  society.  Where  the  doctrine  of  absti¬ 
nence  has  obtained,  by  legitimate  means, — such  as  the  influence 
of  example  and  appeals  to  the  reason  and  conscience, — such 
power  over  a  community  as  to  command  a  spontaneous  vote  of 
banishment  against  ardent  spirit,  we  are  glad  to  hear  of  it,  and 
publish  it  with  pleasure,  as  an  evidence  of  the  progress  of  reform. 

The  licensing  authority  was  usually  in  the  hands  of  county  judges 
or  town  selectmen  and  city  aldermen.  N.  Y.  Observer,  Dec.  20,  1828, 
Feb.  21,  1829,  Sept.  26,  1829;  Journal  of  Humanity,  June  3,  1829; 
Natchez  (Miss.)  Statesman  and  Gazette,  June  20,  1829;  Report  of  Com¬ 
mittee  of  Massachusetts  Society  for  Suppression  of  Intemperance 
(1831),  Mass,  Spy,  March  5,  1834;  Pa.  Temp.  Rec.,  May,  1835,  pp.  17-19, 
February,  1836,  p.  9;  Charleston  Courier,  August  12,  1839. 

42  Journal  of  Humanity,  October  14,  1830,  p.  82. 


170  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

Temperance  societies  should  look  to  such  things  as  likely  to  be 
among  the  happy  results  of  their  labors, — not  as  proper  to  be 
used  as  means  of  attaining  their  object.  .  .  .  We  attribute  the 
astonishing  success  of  temperance  efforts,  in  no  small  degree  to 
the  scrupulous  care,  with  which  agents  and  societies  generally 
have  avoided  every  measure  that  could  lead  to  the  association 
of  their  labors,  even  in  the  minds  of  the  ignorant  and  prejudiced, 
with  the  operations  of  government  and  law.43 

Those  who  shared  these  views  talked  much  of  the  power 
of  moral  suasion  and  the  correct  application  of  Christian 
principles  of  light  and  love,  the  inference  being  that  vice 
could  be  dispelled  by  the  light  of  truth,  if  care  was  taken  not 
to  offend  the  sensibilities  of  the  erring  one.  It  was  folly, 
they  reasoned,  to  force  upon  man  by  legislative  enactment 
that  virtue  which  he  could  only  possess  by  the  dictates  of 
his  conscience  and  the  energy  of  his  will.  Underlying  this 
unwillingness  to  resort  to  legislation  was  the  fear  that  the 
temperance  movement  would  be  torn  asunder  by  political 
strife.  Many  leaders  believed  that  as  soon  as  an  attempt 
was  made  to  alter  or  abolish  the  licensing  system,  the  ene¬ 
mies  of  temperance  would  have  an  opportunity  to  draw  the 
reformers  into  politics.  Such  a  turn  of  affairs  would  be 
nothing  short  of  disasti’ous.  It  would  mean  political  parties 
constantly  angling  for  the  temperance  vote  with  the  result 
that  temperance  objectives  would  be  lost  amid  the  storm  and 
stress  of  local,  state  and  national  elections.44  To  escape 
these  consequences  most  societies  refrained  from  attacking 
the  licensing  system  and  refused,  as  societies,  to  endorse  par¬ 
ticular  men  and  measures.  A  few  groups,  it  is  true,  pledged 
their  members  not  to  vote  for  any  man  for  public  office 

43  Ibid,.,  June  10,  1830,  p.  10. 

44  Ibid.,  January  27,  1831,  p.  142;  Pa.  Temp.  Rec.,  March,  1835,  p.  1; 
Am.  Quart.  Temp.  Mag.,  February,  1833,  pp.  61-62;  Temp.  Rec.,  Nov. 
5,  1833,  p.  67 ;  Walter  Channing,  Thoughts  on  the  Temperance  Reform 
(1834). 


DISSENSION  WITHIN  THE  RANKS  171 

whose  influence  was  hostile  to  temperance,  but  prior  to  1836 
even  such  a  pledge  was  often  regarded  as  a  dangerous  prin¬ 
ciple.45 

To  some  influential  leaders,  however,  the  slow  process 
of  changing  public  opinion  by  precept  and  example  no 
longer  seemed  adequate.  For  ten  years  their  proud 
boast  had  been  that  the  only  weapon  necessary  in  their 
fight  was  moral  suasion,  but  their  early  faith  in  the 
perfectibility  of  man  was  being  sadly  shaken  by  con¬ 
stant  experience  with  man’s  obstinate  refusal  to  forsake  the 
error  of  his  ways.  The  demand  for  a  change  in  methods 
was  gathering  force.  Moral  suasion  had  been  weighed  in 
the  balance  and  found  wanting.  Periodicals,  which  had 
scrupulously  avoided  the  subject,  now  began  to  attack  the 
liquor  laws,  suggesting  that  the  entire  licensing  system  be 
abandoned.40  Said  the  editor  of  the  Pennsylvania  Temper¬ 
ance  Recorder  in  1836: 

For  ourselves  we  have  ever  been  of  the  opinion  that  this  great 
moral  reform  is  not  to  be  accomplished  by  any  one  movement, 
but  by  a  great  variety  of  movements.  If  the  legislation  of 
by-gone  days,  days  of  darkness,  sustains  a  false  public  sentiment, 
it  is  important  that  that  legislation  he  changed.  The  direction 
of  the  attention  of  the  community  to  that  legislation,  an  examina¬ 
tion  of  its  correctness  by  every  man  and  woman  who  is  asked  to 
sign  a  memorial,  will  help  to  change  that  public  sentiment. 
Hitherto  the  broad  shield  of  legislation  has  been  cast  over  the 
traffic  in  ardent  spirits.  And,  though  the  object  of  the  statute 
has  been  to  restrict  the  sale  within  certain  bounds,  it  has  virtually 
legalized  it;  and  men  have  plead  that  what  was  legally  right 
could  not  be  morally  wrong.  And  hence  our  legislation,  de- 

45  P.  T.  D.,  I,  240-241;  Ga.  Journal,  May  22,  1830;  Annual  Report  of 
the  Young  Men’s  Temperance  Society  of  New  Haven  (1836);  Am. 
Quart.  Temp.  Mag.,  May,  1833,  p.  134. 

4«  P.  T.  D.,  I,  270-278. 


172  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

signed  for  good,  has  stood  much  in  the  way  of  the  temperance 
reform.47 

In  January,  1837,  the  New  York  Temperance  Recorder  car¬ 
ried  an  argument  in  favour  of  legislation  as  the  only  means 
to  curb  the  “mercenary  recklessness”  of  those  who  opposed 
temperance  principles.  In  the  same  month  the  initial  issue 
of  the  Journal,  edited  by  the  American  Temperance  Union, 
denounced  the  licence  system  as  governmental  sanction  of  an 
immoral  traffic.48 

So  legislation  was  urged  as  a  last  resort  in  a  critical 
struggle.  All  the  achievements  of  a  decade  would  be  lost, 
said  certain  alarmists,  if  legislative  enactments  were  not 
invoked  against  manufacturers  and  vendors  of  intoxicating 
liquor.  The  victories  won  by  intellectual  appeals  would 
have  to  be  preserved  in  the  statutes  of  state  and  nation. 
Those  who  advocated  more  stringent  legal  restrictions  ad¬ 
mitted  that  it  was  seldom  politic  to  summon  legislation  to 
the  aid  of  reform.  They  realized  that  laws  strikingly  in 
advance  of  public  opinion  were  destitute  of  efficacy,  but 
they  firmly  believed  that  the  psychological  moment  had 
arrived  to  translate  the  opinion  of  a  well  organized  minority 
into  law.  It  was  time  to  amend  the  licensing  system.  Un¬ 
fortunately  for  this  group  of  reformers  there  was  little  har¬ 
mony  of  counsel  within  their  ranks.  While  some  insisted 
that  the  cause  could  be  best  served  by  strict  enforcement 
of  an  almost  prohibitory  system  of  licences,  many  desired 
to  repeal  all  licence  laws  and  make  the  sale  of  ardent  spirits 
a  misdemeanour.  Still  others  believed  that  each  local  ad¬ 
ministrative  district  should  be  given  power  to  deal  with  the 
traffic  as  the  authorities  deemed  best.  On  one  point  only  was 
there  substantial  agreement  among  the  “legal  restriction- 

47  Pa.  Temp.  Rec.,  Feb.,  1836,  pp.  12-13. 

48  Temp.  Rec.,  January,  1837,  p.  85;  Journal,  January,  1837. 


DISSENSION  WITHIN  THE  RANKS  173 

ists” ;  some  sort  of  legislative  attack  was  to  be  launched 
against  the  trade  in  spirituous  liquors. 

Petitions  and  memorials  to  state  legislatures  were  so 
numerous  during  1838  that  it  was  known  as  the  “petition 
year.”  Despite  differences  of  opinion  among  the  petitioners, 
there  was  a  dominant  note  in  their  appeals.  It  was  the  plea 
that  the  state  should  withdraw  its  approval  from  a  business 
which  constantly  preyed  upon  society,  taking  its  toll  in  the 
form  of  paupers,  maniacs  and  criminals.49  Although  these 
appeals  seemed  to  represent  an  overwhelming  majority  of 
the  temperance  forces,  they  served  to  arouse  widespread 
resentment  on  the  part  of  a  minority  group.  Through 
pamphlets,  newspapers  and  temperance  journals  the  moral 
suasionists,  as  they  called  themselves,  ridiculed  the  attempt  to 
legislate  intemperance  from  the  nation,  characterizing  it  as 
a  device  to  make  the  constable  a  substitute  for  the  teacher 
and  the  preacher.  They  regretted  the  folly  of  their  radical 
friends  who  were  willing  to  base  a  great  moral  reform  on 
that  most  uncertain  of  all  elements  in  social  regulation,  legal 
enactment.  To  depend  upon  the  strong  arm  of  the  law  to 
enforce  a  reformation  in  manners  and  morals  was  to  confess 
defeat.  Furthermore,  between  voluntary  abstinence  associa¬ 
tions  and  laws  forbidding  the  sale  and  use  of  distilled  spirits 
there  was  a  wide  gulf  fixed,  which  could  not  be  bridged  by 
any  plea  of  expediency.  Men  might  be  persuaded  to  change 
their  habits;  they  could  not  be  coerced.  It  was,  therefore, 
inevitable  that  an  appeal  to  the  government’s  coercive  power 
would  alienate  many  devoted  friends  of  temperance.  They 
would  regard  the  new  policy  as  a  flagrant  infringement  of 
their  personal  liberty  and  as  an  unwarranted  interference  of 

Societies  in  Maine,  Vermont,  Massachusetts,  Connecticut,  New 
York,  Pennsylvania,  Maryland,  Ohio  and  Tennessee  were  particularly 
active  in  presenting  petitions.  P.  T.  D.,  II,  51-66,  204-206;  Pa.  Temp. 
Rec.,  May,  1837,  p.  37;  Journal,  May,  1838,  January,  1839.  For  the 
result  of  this  movement  see  Chapter  XI. 


174  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

non-political  associations  in  the  realm  of  political  affairs.50 

The  fears  of  the  moral  suasionists  became  a  reality  in 
Georgia.  Josiah  Flournoy,  a  prosperous  planter  of  Eaton- 
ton  and  an  exhorter  in  the  Methodist  Church,  decided  in 
1838  to  campaign  for  the  repeal  of  the  state  licence  law. 
During  the  early  months  of  1839  he  organized  the  temperance 
forces  in  support  of  such  action  and  sought  to  bring  pressure 
on  the  general  assembly.  It  soon  became  evident,  however, 
that  the  old-line  politicians  at  the  behest  of  the  liquor  in¬ 
terests  intended  to  take  no  action  in  the  matter.  Accord^ 
ingly,  Flournoy  urged  his  followers  to  nominate  candidates 
for  the  new  assembly  in  their  respective  districts  and  work 
for  the  election  of  temperance  men.  This  was  done  in  many 
districts,  but  the  “Flournoy”  candidates,  new  to  the  in¬ 
tricacies  of  politics,  discovered  that  the  temperance  issue 
speedily  gave  way  to  a  bitter  factional  fight  between  Van 
Buren  and  anti-Van  Buren,  or  Union  and  States’  Rights 
parties.  Out  of  the  confusion  came  defeat  for  the  temper¬ 
ance  candidates  and  a  pronounced  feeling  of  resentment 
against  Flournoy’s  followers  for  their  injudicious  meddling 
in  matters  purely  political.  As  a  result  the  temperance 
cause  in  Georgia,  as  the  moral  suasionists  had  prophesied, 
suffered  a  disastrous  set-back.51 

It  was  with  mingled  pride  and  apprehension,  therefore, 
that  temperance  editors  noted  the  unusual  consideration 
which  their  cause  was  receiving  from  professional  politicians. 
While  it  was  pleasant  to  have  evidence  that  their  forces 

50(7/.  Edward  B.  Hall,  The  Temperance  Reform,  pp.  1-14;  Leonard 
Withington,  A  Review  of  the  late  Temperance  Movement  in  Massa¬ 
chusetts,  pp.  22-23,  26;  Arethusa  Hall,  Life  and  Character  of  the 
Rev _  Sylvester  Judd  pp.  312,  315.  Several  newspapers  normally 
friendly  to  temperance  principles  attacked  the  new  tendency  as 
a  fatal  mistake  on  the  part  of  the  reformers.  For  example,  see 
Charleston  (S.  C.)  Courier,  Sept.  24,  26,  1839;  Mass.  Spy,  May  8,  1838; 
Manufacturers  and  Farmers  Journal  (Providence),  Feb.  24,  1840,  May 
6,  1841  ;  Delaware  Gazette,  May  13,  1842. 

Bi  Scomp,  op.  cit.,  pp.  328-336. 


DISSENSION  WITHIN  THE  RANKS  175 
were  no  longer  a  negligible  element  in  the  body  politic,  it 
was  also  dangerous  to  have  party  leaders  vying  with  each 
other  for  the  “temperance  vote.”  Yet  the  reformers  could 
not  well  control  the  ramifications  of  partisanship.  During 
state  and  federal  campaigns  there  was  much  recrimination 
of  intemperance,  most  of  it  thinly  veiled  attempts  to  in¬ 
fluence  thousands  of  abstainers  throughout  the  country. 
Did  the  Van  Buren  newspapers  refer  with  righteous  scorn 
to  “federal  feasts  and  champagne,”  rival  journals  rejoined 
in  pointed  paragraphs  about  the  sojourn  of  the  President’s 
entourage  in  Richmond  and  the  plentiful  refreshment  with 
“punch  and  julep.”  52  The  presidential  campaign  of  1840 
made  it  particularly  difficult  for  temperance  men  to  keep 
their  cause  free  from  political  quarrels.  Whig  log-cabins  in 
nearly  every  village  dispensed  hard  cider  and  enthusiasm, 
while  the  Democrats  referred  to  them  as  “groggeries”  and 
urged  the  enemies  of  the  liquor  traffic  to  beware.53  In  re¬ 
buke  they  drank  their  toasts  in  pure  cold  water.  Preachers, 
heartily  applauded  by  Van  Buren  men,  anathematized  the 
Whigs  for  their  noisy  devotion  to  strong  drink,  and  out¬ 
raged  correspondents  demanded  that  the  temperance  jour¬ 
nals  denounce  Harrison  and  Tyler.54  The  leading  reform¬ 
ers,  however,  were  too  cautious  to  be  drawn  into  an  alliance 
with  a  particular  party.  They  welcomed  Democratic  ed¬ 
itors  who  had  suddenly  become  convinced  of  the  advisability 
of  abstinence,  but  they  were  careful  to  point  out  that  Gen¬ 
eral  Harrison’s  qualifications  for  office  far  transcended  the 
kind  of  campaign  his  friends  were  waging  for  him.55  They 

52  Albany  Argus,  August,  1838;  Springfield  Republican,  July  11, 
1838,  July  20,  1839. 

53  Rough  Hewer,  May  26,  Aug.  13,  Sept.  10,  1840. 

5 *New  Haven  Palladium,  May  22,  27,  1840. 

55  Journal,  June,  1840,  p.  93,  July,  pp.  101,  104,  August,  p.  115.  The 
editor  of  the  Columbus  (Miss.)  Democrat  believed  that  the  Whig  cam¬ 
paign  had  made  many  Democratic  editors  temperance  advocates.  July 
18,  1840;  also  Richmond  Enquirer,  Dec.  1,  1840. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


176 

deplored  Whig  methods,  but  refused  to  admit  that,  in  matters 
unrelated  to  the  liquor  problem,  there  could  be  any  such 
thing  as  the  “temperance  vote.”  Of  course,  this  attitude  did 
not  prevent  politicians  from  continuing  their  appeals  to  the 
rank  and  file  of  the  reformers.56 

In  the  meantime  the  question  of  abolitionism  had  arisen 
to  threaten  sectional  disruption  of  a  movement  already  di¬ 
vided  by  quarrels  between  moral  suasionists  and  legal  sua- 
sionists,  between  supporters  of  the  old  pledge  and  of  the 
new.  After  William  Lloyd  Garrison  established  the  Liber¬ 
ator  in  1831,  many  southerners  began  to  distrust  the  tem¬ 
perance  journals  which  came  out  of  New  England.  They 
recalled  that  for  several  months  in  1828  Garrison  had  been 
editor  of  the  National  Philanthropist,  allied  with  the  Ameri¬ 
can  Temperance  Society,  and  they  interpreted  this  editorial 
relationship  as  an  indication  that  a  strong  bond  of  sym¬ 
pathy  existed  between  temperance  and  abolition  periodicals. 
In  South  Carolina  the  state  society  recommended  in  Decem¬ 
ber,  1832,  that  its  auxiliaries  subscribe  for  the  Temperance 
Recorder,  published  by  the  New  York  state  society.  This 
selection  was  made  because  the  executive  committee  found 
that  the  Recorder  was  “exclusively  confined  to  the  subject 
of  temperance,  and  has  manifested  no  disposition  to  meddle 
with  the  local  institutions  of  the  South.”  57  The  same 
recommendation  could  have  been  given  to  most  northern 
journals  of  this  period,  for  temperance  editors  were  usually 
careful  not  to  offend  their  southern  associates  in  the  reform. 
It  was  true,  however,  that  northern  temperance  societies  were 
filled  with  determined  anti-slavery  men  and  women,  who  were 

s6  In  New  York  Governor  Seward  paid  tribute  to  the  temperance 
cause  at  the  New  Year’s  Day  reception  in  1842,  when  he  ordered  that 
nothing  but  lemonade  and  cold  water  should  be  served.  Autobiography 
of  William  II.  Seward,  p.  589. 

57  Permanent  Temperance  Documents  of  South  Carolina,  p.  108. 
Cited  in  Scomp,  op.  cit.,  p.  300. 


DISSENSION  WITHIN  THE  RANKS  177 

not  averse  to  stating  their  position.68  In  1833  the  state 
society  of  Pennsylvania  took  cognizance  of  this  fact  in  its 
annual  report.  A  carefully  worded  statement  explained 
that,  while  many  members  were  personally  hostile  to  slavery 
in  the  abstract,  no  society  had  so  far  forgotten  the  design 
of  its  formation  as  to  attempt  to  aid  the  anti-slavery  cause. 
An  appeal  was  made  to  the  “southern  brethren”  not  to  al¬ 
low  fancied  grievances  to  interfere  with  a  national  campaign 
against  intemperance.  The  Pennsylvania  leaders  were  sure 
that  the  temperance  movement  would  never  be  used  to  dis¬ 
credit  southern  institutions.59  Such  assurance  from  the 
North  did  not  remove  all  causes  of  irritation.  In  Georgia 
the  fact  that  subscribers  to  the  Temperance  Recorder  were 
deluged  with  abolition  literature  gave  colour  to  the  charge 
that  the  abolitionists  and  the  temperance  leaders  were  Avork- 
ing  together.  This  the  editor  of  the  Recorder  indignantly 
denied,  but  in  1835  the  Georgia  state  society  instructed  its 
members  to  discontinue  the  New  York  journal.  At  the  same 
time  the  executive  committee  took  action  to  sever  its  tenuous 
connection  with  the  American  Temperance  Society,  declar¬ 
ing  that  the  Georgia  society  had  never  been  an  auxiliary  of 
the  Boston  organization.60  Although  none  of  the  other 
southern  states  followed  the  example  of  Georgia,  the  rela¬ 
tions  between  northern  and  southern  groups  were  not  entirely 
cordial  after  1836.  When  the  American  Temperance  Union 
took  up  the  work  of  the  national  organization,  it  experienced 
great  difficulty  in  securing  information  concerning  the  prog¬ 
ress  of  reform  in  the  lower  South. 

With  numerous  factions  working  at  cross  purposes  it  was 

58  The  prominent  position  in  temperance  councils  of  such  enemies  of 
slavery  as  William  Jay,  Theodore  Frelinyhuysen,  Arthur  and  Lewis 
Tappan  and  Gerrit  Smith  did  not  tend  to  reassure  the  southern 
societies. 

5 *  Anniversary  Report  of  the  Pennsylvania  State  Temperance  Society 
(1833),  p.  7. 

«o  Scomp,  op.  cit.,  pp.  301-302. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


178 

not  strange  that  the  temperance  movement  fell  upon  lean 
years.  The  reformers,  however,  managed  to  put  on  a  bold 
front.  When  achievements  at  home  were  few,  they  proudly 
proclaimed  triumphs  abroad,  which  testified  to  the  ever 
widening  sphere  of  their  missionary  activity.  During  the 
last  half  of  the  decade  of  the  thirties  thousands  of  copies  of 
a  Circular  to  Emigrants  were  sent  to  London  for  distribution 
in  Great  Britain  and  continental  countries,  that  persons  in¬ 
tending  to  migrate  to  the  United  States  might  learn  of  the 
temperance  reform  before  entering  the  country.61  In 
France,  Robert  Baird  had  constituted  himself  an  advance 
agent  for  the  spread  of  propaganda.  His  History  of  the 
Temperance  Societies  of  the  United  States  was  translated 
into  French,  Dutch,  German,  Swedish,  Russian  and  Hun¬ 
garian  and  distributed  through  his  efforts  in  the  countries 
mentioned.  As  a  result  of  Baird’s  energetic  work  the  Crown 
Prince  of  Prussia  became  a  patron  of  a  total  abstinence 
society,  and  King  Frederick  William  III  ordered  that  a  soci¬ 
ety  be  organized  in  every  province.62  In  Stockholm  a  tem¬ 
perance  periodical,  approved  by  Charles  XIV,  enjoyed  a 
considerable  circulation  among  the  Swedish  and  Norwegian 
peoples.  The  far-flung  borders  of  the  reform  already  in¬ 
cluded  points  in  Asia,  Africa  and  the  islands  of  the  Pacific. 
In  Odessa,  on  the  Bosphorus,  in  Madras  and  Bombay  the 
Journal  of  the  American  Temperance  Union  was  read  with 
interest.63 

No  developments  in  Europe  were  quite  as  encouraging  to 
Americans  as  those  in  the  British  Isles.  English  and  Scotch 

si  The  circular  was  first  published  by  the  New  York  State  Temperance 
Society.  See  Temp.  Rec.,  July  2,  1833;  Journal,  September,  1839,  p.  132. 

82  Baird  represented  the  French  Evangelical  Association,  a  missionary 
union  supported  by  Protestant  denominations  in  the  United  States 
and  France.  H.  M.  Baird,  Life  of  the  Rev.  Robert  Baird,  pp.  105-143; 
P.  T.  D.,  II,  100-101. 

83  P.  T.  D.,  II,  101-105;  J.  S.  Buckingham,  History  and  Progress  of 
the  Temperance  Reformation  in  Great  Britain,  pp.  97-98. 


DISSENSION  WITHIN  THE  RANKS  179 

leaders  in  temperance  work  had  paid  the  American  societies 
the  sincere  compliment  of  imitation,  in  many  instances  mak¬ 
ing  public  profession  of  the  fact  that  their  inspiration  came 
from  the  United  States.64  Some  of  the  first  temperance 
pamphlets  distributed  in  Great  Britain  were  of  American 
origin,  and  editors  of  later  publications  drew  upon  Ameri¬ 
can  experience  to  give  point  to  their  arguments.65  The  two 
movements  learned  to  co-operate  with  each  other  so  effec¬ 
tively  that  methods  adopted  by  one  were  speedily  taken  up 
by  the  other.  Harmonious  relations  were  further  insured  b}' 
a  happy  exchange  of  visits  between  distinguished  reformers 
in  the  two  fields.  From  1837  to  1839  James  Silk  Bucking¬ 
ham,  famous  for  his  exhaustive  reports  to  Parliament  on  in¬ 
temperance  and  its  remedy,  brought  encouraging  messages 
from  Great  Britain  to  hundreds  of  audiences  in  all  parts  of 
the  United  States.  At  the  same  time  Edward  C.  Delavan 
received  an  enthusiastic  reception  in  England  and  Scotland, 
an  eloquent  testimonial  of  unity  of  spirit  that  knew  no  geo¬ 
graphical  barriers.66 

During  the  years  which  Buckingham  spent  in  America  and 
Delavan  in  Europe  the  most  signal  victory  of  the  temperance 
forces  was  won  in  Ireland.  Early  in  April,  1838,  Theobald 
Mathew,  a  Catholic  priest  of  the  Capuchin  order,  announced 
his  intention  to  devote  a  large  share  of  his  time  to  the  pro¬ 
motion  of  temperance  among  his  parishioners.  For  many 
years  he  had  been  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of 
the  city  work-house  in  Cork,  where  his  duties  had  brought 
him  into  close  contact  with  the  baneful  effects  of  intem- 

64  Buckingham,  op.  cit.,  pp.  11-12;  Dorchester,  op.  cit.,  pp.  320-321; 
Samuel  Couling,  History  of  the  Temperance  Movement  in  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland,  p.  28. 

65  John  Dunlop,  one  of  the  pioneer  reformers  in  Scotland,  drew 
largely  upon  the  American  situation  for  material  in  writing  his  treatise 
On  the  Extent  and  Remedy  of  National  Intemperance.  Henry  Forbes, 
who  organized  the  first  abstinence  society  in  England,  used  Beecher’s 
Six  Sermons  as  his  first  tract.  Couling,  op.  cit.,  p.  42. 

66  p.  T.  D.,  II,  135-136;  Buckingham,  op.  cit.,  95,  98. 


180  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

perance.  At  the  earnest  solicitation  of  William  Martin,  a 
Quaker  and  one  of  his  associates  on  the  Board,  Father 
Mathew  agreed  to  organize  a  total  abstinence  society  in  his 
congregation.  At  the  initial  meeting  he  and  fifty-nine  of  his 
parishioners  signed  the  following  pledge :  “I  promise  while 
I  belong  to  the  teetotal  abstinence  society  to  abstain  from 
all  kinds  of  intoxicating  drink,  unless  used  medically,  and 
that  I  will  discountenance  by  advice  and  example  the  causes 
of  intemperance  in  others.”  For  a  few  weeks  the  popular 
priest  addressed  audiences  twice  a  week  in  the  largest  hall 
in  Cork,  where  more  than  4000  crowded  in  to  hear  him.  So 
immediate  was  the  response  to  his  appeals  that  within  eight 
months  156,000  names  had  been  entered  on  the  books  of  the 
society.  Delegations  came  from  the  neighbouring  counties 
of  Waterford,  Limerick,  Clare,  Tipperary  and  even  remote 
Galway,  listened  in  a  spirit  of  veneration  to  the  lectures  and 
took  the  obligation  as  if  they  were  performing  a  religious 
rite.  When  Father  Mathew  visited  Limerick  in  December, 
1839,  the  crowds  that  assembled  to  see  and  hear  him  were 
larger  than  the  city  could  accommodate.  At  one  ceremony 
it  was  estimated  that  more  than  15,000,  kneeling  in  the 
streets  through  which  he  walked,  received  the  pledge.  Wher¬ 
ever  he  journeyed  in  his  native  land  the  people  flocked  to 
him,  as  if  they  were  making  a  sacred  pilgrimage.67 

This  “glorious  news  from  Ireland”  was  fully  reported 
in  American  temperance  journals  and  called  forth  numerous 
speculations  concerning  its  effect  on  Irish  Catholics  in  the 
United  States.  Most  leaders  hoped  there  would  be  a  per¬ 
ceptible  quickening  of  interest,  for  the  time  seemed  right  to 

87  The  best  description  of  Father  Mathew’s  work  in  Ireland  is  to  be 
found  in  J.  F.  Maguire’s  Father  Mathew,  pp.  8-149.  See  also  Illustrated 
Memoir  of  Father  Mathew  (1847);  Journal,  files  for  1840.  Many 
attributed  his  phenomenal  success  to  the  fact  that  the  medals  which 
he  gave  to  all  pledge-signers  were  prized  by  their  recipients  for  their 
power  to  heal  the  sick.  J.  G.  Adams  and  E.  H.  Chapin,  The  Fountain, 

pp.  18-22. 


DISSENSION  WITHIN  THE  RANKS  181 
enlist  Catholic  congregations  in  the  reform.68  The  hopes  of 
the  leaders  were  realized.  During  1839  and  1840  accounts 
of  the  movement  in  Ireland  and  the  arrival  of  immigrants  who 
had  signed  Father  Mathew’s  pledge  encouraged  priests  and 
bishops  in  this  country  to  press  more  vigorously  the  fight 
against  intemperance  among  their  people.  As  a  result 
Catholic  abstinence  societies  were  formed  in  many  of  the 
larger  cities.  The  Boston  Catholic  Confraternity  was  or¬ 
ganized  in  1840  on  the  basis  of  total  abstinence  from  all  in¬ 
toxicants.  In  Philadelphia  Bishop  Kenrick  presided  over  a 
meeting  in  the  cathedral  which  established  a  society  on  the 
principles  advocated  by  Father  Mathew,  while  in  New  York 
the  congregation  of  the  Church  of  the  Transfiguration  took 
the  lead  in  espousing  the  cause.69  Father  Curry  in  Provi¬ 
dence  and  Father  Schneller  in  Albany  were  hailed  as  worthy 
disciples  of  the  Irish  priest.70  These  manifestations  of  the 
influence  exercised  by  a  humble  priest  hundreds  of  miles 
across  the  sea  convinced  friends  of  temperance  that  an  effort 
should  be  made  to  bring  Father  Mathew  to  the  United 
States.  Although  the  invitation  was  extended  by  both  Cath¬ 
olics  and  Protestants,  and  was  accepted,  the  visit  had  to  be 
indefinitely  postponed  because  of  Father  Mathew’s  pastoral 
duties.  Not  until  1849  was  the  Irish  reformer  able  to  test 
his  power  in  a  strange  land. 

68  Manufacturers  and  Farmers  Journal,  June  22,  1840,  March  1,  22, 
1841;  Delaware  Gazette,  July  15,  1842;  Journal,  February,  1840,  p.  28, 
March,  pp.  44-46;  May,  pp.  77-79. 

09  Journal,  March,  1840,  p.  48,  April,  p.  57,  May,  p.  80,  July,  p.  105, 
Marsh,  op.  cit.,  pp.  73-75. 

to  Manufacturers  and  Farmers  Journal,  Oct.  8,  1840;  Baltimore 
Patriot,  March  21,  1842. 


CHAPTER  IX 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL 

The  dissensions  which  marred  the  temperance  movement  just 
prior  to  1840 — the  quarrels  between  conservatives  and  sup¬ 
porters  of  a  total  abstinence  pledge,  the  controversy  over 
the  advisability  of  invoking  the  aid  of  legislation,  the  com¬ 
plication  of  the  abolition  question — all  were  overshadowed 
or  forgotten  during  the  opening  years  of  the  Washingtonian 
revival.  Signs  of  hesitancy  and  discouragement,  apparent 
in  many  of  the  older  societies,  seemed  gradually  to  disappear 
before  the  force  of  an  intense  emotional  appeal  that  swept 
the  country.  It  was  an  appeal  voiced  largely  by  reformed 
drunkards,  a  class  which  hitherto  had  played  an  inconspicu¬ 
ous  role  in  the  drama  of  temperance  reform.  Believing  that 
the  confirmed  inebriate  was  hopelessly  beyond  regeneration, 
most  reformers  had  given  scant  consideration  to  his  plight. 
They  had  rather  devoted  their  time  to  the  task  of  saving  the 
moderate  drinker  from  becoming  a  drunkard.  But  now  they 
were  confronted  by  the  spectacle  of  the  drunkard  trying 
to  save  himself.1 

The  Washingtonian  revival  originated,  so  far  as  any  com¬ 
plex  movement  may  be  said  to  have  a  single  origin,  among  a 
group  of  tipplers  in  Chase’s  Tavern,  Baltimore,  Maryland. 
On  the  evening  of  April  2,  1840,  six  convivial  friends,  long  ac¬ 
customed  to  while  away  their  evenings  in  gaming  and  drink- 
i  Justin  Edwards,  at  the  time  of  the  formation  of  the  American 
Temperance  Society,  had  scouted  the  idea  that  the  drunkard  could  be 
reformed.  Not  all  reformers  agreed  with  him,  but  few  directed  their 
efforts  toward  saving  the  degenerate. 

182 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL 


183 

ing,  met  at  the  tavern  with  no  thought  of  changing  the  usual 
program.  In  a  spirit  of  fun,  however,  one  of  their  number 
suggested  that  they  send  a  committee  to  hear  a  temperance 
lecturer  who  was  announced  to  speak  in  a  nearby  church. 
The  committee  returned  from  the  lecture  with  an  enthusiastic 
report  of  what  they  had  heard,  which  started  a  spirited  dis¬ 
cussion  of  the  total  abstinence  principle  and  its  power  to 
change  men’s  habits.  This  interchange  of  views  resulted 
in  a  decision  to  form  a  society  which  would  commit  them  to 
abstinence  from  the  use  of  all  intoxicants.  William  K. 
Mitchell,  who  was  delegated  to  put  their  resolution  into  writ¬ 
ing,  presented  the  following  pledge  for  their  approval: 
“We,  whose  names  are  annexed,  desirous  of  forming  a  society 
for  our  mutual  benefit,  and  to  safeguard  against  a  pernicious 
practice  which  is  injurious  to  our  health,  standing  and 
families,  do  pledge  ourselves  as  gentlemen,  that  we  will  not 
drink  any  spirituous  or  malt  liquors,  wine  or  cider.”  Hav¬ 
ing  signed  this  comprehensive  pledge,  the  six  charter  members 
turned  their  attention  to  the  election  of  officers,  the  method 
of  obtaining  revenue  and  the  problem  of  securing  new  mem¬ 
bers.  It  was  agreed  that  each  member  should  bring  a  friend 
to  the  first  regular  meeting,  that  an  initiation  fee  of  twenty- 
five  cents  should  be  charged,  and  that  the  monthly  dues 
should  be  twelve  and  one-half  cents.  A  suggestion  that  the 
new  association  be  named  in  honour  of  Thomas  Jefferson 
having  been  rejected,  the  group  decided  that  the  society 
should  be  called  the  “Washington  Temperance  Societ}^.”  In 
choosing  the  Father  of  his  Country  as  their  patron  they  were 
guided  by  an  admiration  of  his  character,  rather  than  by  a 
desire  to  imitate  his  practice  regarding  the  use  of  intoxi¬ 
cants.2 

2  These  facts  are  contained  in  the  Annual  Report  of  the  Maryland 
State  Temperance  Society  (1842).  See  also  Journal,  January, 
1841,  pp.  6-7;  P.  T.  D.,  II,  289-290.  The  charter  members  were 
William  K.  Mitchell,  David  Anderson,  Archibald  Campbell,  John  P, 
Hoss,  James  McCurley  and  George  Steers. 


184  the  origins  of  prohibition 

Labelling  themselves  as  reformed  drunkards,  the  founders 
of  the  new  movement  were  immediately  successful  in  per¬ 
suading  others  to  join  them.  Within  a  few  weeks  it  was 
necessary  for  them  to  seek  more  extensive  accommodations  in 
a  hall  of  their  own.  As  the  society  grew,  the  problem  of 
making  the  meetings  interesting  demanded  solution.  Presi¬ 
dent  Mitchell,  quick  to  sense  that  which  would  be  popular, 
suggested  that  the  programs  of  stated  meetings  be  limited 
to  a  narration  of  personal  experiences  by  members  who  had 
felt  the  saving  influence  of  the  pledge.  In  conformity  with 
this  suggestion  the  Baltimore  society  admitted  no  outside 
speakers,  unless  they  desired  to  relate  their  experiences  as 
reformed  men.  Thus,  the  standard  for  other  Washington¬ 
ian  societies  was  set,  and  the  chief  characteristic  of  the  move¬ 
ment  became  the  reformation  of  drunkards  by  reformed 
drunkards.  “Experience  meetings”  attracted  the  attention 
and  held  the  interest  of  hundreds  who  had  not  been  reached 
by  educational  propaganda  issued  by  the  older  societies. 
Shocking  stories  of  degeneracy  mingled  with  joyous  testi¬ 
mony  of  redemption,  now  and  then  relieved  by  humorous 
anecdotes,  proved  so  effective  in  winning  converts  that  by 
Christmas  of  1840  more  than  1000  in  the  city  called  them¬ 
selves  “Washingtonians.” 

From  the  beginning  the  missionary  impulse  was  strong 
in  the  Baltimore  society,  but  the  first  promising  opportunity 
to  extend  the  influence  of  the  movement  beyond  the  confines 
of  its  native  city  came  in  the  spring  of  1841, 3  when  an  invi¬ 
tation  was  accepted  to  carry  the  message  to  New  York  City. 
A  delegation  of  five  under  the  leadership  of  William  K. 
Mitchell  and  John  H.  W.  Hawkins  conducted  a  series  of 
eighteen  meetings  during  the  latter  part  of  March,  which 
were  attended  by  thousands  whose  curiosity  had  been  aroused 
through  reading  the  reports  from  Baltimore.  Churches  of 
various  Protestant  denominations  threw  open  their  doors  to 
s  Journal,  July,  1840,  p.  102. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  185 
the  speakers,  but  no  auditorium  was  large  enought  to  accom¬ 
modate  the  crowds.  The  initial  session  gave  promise  of  the 
success  that  was  to  follow,  for  Hawkins’  dramatic  recital  of 
the  sordid  incidents  in  his  life  deeply  moved  his  audience. 
Several  interrupted  with  the  plea  that  they  desired  to  sign 
the  pledge  at  once  and  be  saved.  At  the  conclusion  of  his 
address  scores  pressed  forward  to  grasp  his  hand  and  receive 
his  words  of  encouragement.  Others  crowded  up  to  the  plat¬ 
form,  eager  to  take  the  obligation  of  total  abstinence.  The 
revival  in  New  York  had  begun.  Each  successive  meeting  was 
the  scene  of  an  enthusiastic  response  to  the  emotional  ap¬ 
peals  of  the  Washingtonians.  As  the  audiences  grew  ever 
larger,  it  seemed  wise  to  arrange  an  open  air  meeting.  At  a 
gathering  in  City  Hall  Park  more  than  4000  had  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  hear  the  novel  manner  in  which  the  reformers  pre¬ 
sented  their  message.  To  the  crowd’s  delight  the  speakers 
mounted  upturned  rum-kegs  from  which  vantage  point  they 
related  their  numerous  experiences  with  the  demon,  rum. 
While  the  meeting  was  in  progress,  agents  were  busy  in  the 
throng  securing  members  for  the  first  Washington  Tem¬ 
perance  Society  in  New  York  City.  Many  of  the  curious 
must  have  been  convinced,  for  at  the  close  of  the  campaign 
almost  1800  had  signed  the  total  abstinence  pledge  and  en¬ 
listed  under  the  new  banner.4 

Following  their  triumphs  in  New  York  the  Washington- 
ions  returned  to  Baltimore  in  order  to  participate  in  the 
first  anniversary  celebration  of  their  society.  Elaborate 
preparations  had  been  made  for  a  procession  which  would 
represent  every  temperance  organization  in  the  city,  what¬ 
ever  its  origin  or  principles.  The  efforts  of  the  committee 
on  arrangements  were  well  rewarded  on  April  5  by  the  pres¬ 
ence  in  the  line  of  march  of  more  than  6000,  each  society 
with  its  own  standard  and  every  member  wearing  an  appro- 

*  JVT.  Y.  Commercial  Advertiser,  March  22,  1841;  Journal,  April,  1841, 
pp.  49-53. 


186  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

priate  badge.  The  place  of  honour  was  given  to  the  re¬ 
formed  drunkards  who  had  joined  the  Washingtonian  ranks 
during  the  year,  but  the  section  most  observed  by  spectators 
who  lined  the  streets  was  that  containing  nearly  one  thou¬ 
sand  boys  and  girls,  volunteers  in  the  “Cold  Water  Army.” 
These  youthful  soldiers,  parading  in  their  white  and  blue 
uniforms,  waving  their  inscribed  banners,  and  singing  tem¬ 
perance  songs,  gave  more  promise  for  the  future  than  the 
hundreds  whose  lives  had  been  reformed.5 

News  of  the  successful  work  in  Baltimore  and  New  York 
was  not  slow  in  reaching  other  parts  of  the  country,  with  the 
result  that  Washingtonian  speakers  and  organizers  were 
much  in  demand.  On  April  13  Hawkins  and  his  friend,  Wil¬ 
liam  E.  Wright,  arrived  in  Boston  to  conduct  a  series  of 
meetings  in  the  churches.  Their  arrival  having  been  well 
heralded  in  the  press,  crowds  larger  than  those  in  New  York 

5  In  1836  Thomas  P.  Hunt,  one  of  the  leading  Presbyterian  ministers 
of  his  day,  began  to  interest  boys  and  girls  in  societies  which  he  called 
units  in  his  Cold  Water  Army.  During  his  travels  over  the  country 
he  tried  to  organize  such  a  society  in  every  Sunday  School  which 
he  visited.  Though  hundreds  of  units  were  formed  there  was  no  at¬ 
tempt  to  effect  a  central  control  of  the  movement.  Rev.  Hunt 
stressed  the  participation  of  his  “volunteers”  in  all  temperance 
processions  and  pageants.  Pie  wrote  the  following  pledge  for  the 
army: 

We  do  not  think  we’ll  ever  drink, 

Whisky  or  gin,  brandy  or  rum, 

Or  anything  that’ll  make  drunk  come. 

The  work  among  the  children  was  carried  forward  with  great  success 
and  the  army  became  a  colourful  part  of  the  temperance  celebrations. 
Thomas  P.  Hunt,  The  Cold  Water  Army;  W.  P.  White,  “A  Historic 
Nineteenth  Century  Character,”  Journal  of  Presbyterian  Historical 
Society,  X,  164;  Journal,  May,  1841,  p.  76;  Marsh,  op.  cit.,  p.  98; 
Manufacturers  and  Farmers  Journal,  March  2,  1840;  State  Banner 
(Bennington,  Vt.),  July  12,  1842;  Baltimore  Patriot,  Jan.  4,  1842; 
Daily  Evening  Transcript,  May  28,  1844;  Boston  Daily  Journal,  May 
18,  1846. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  187 

welcomed  them.6  Of  one  of  the  first  meetings  the  Daily 
Mail  said: 

The  Odeon  was  filled  to  its  utmost  capacity,  last  evening, 
b}7  a  promiscuous  audience  of  temperance  men,  distillers,  whole¬ 
salers  and  retail  dealers  in  ardent  spirits,  confirmed  inebriates, 
moderate  drinkers,  lovers  of  the  social  glass,  teetotalers,  etc., 
to  listen  to  the  speeches  of  the  famous  “Reformed  Drunkards,” 
delegates  from  the  Washington  Temperance  Society  of  Balti¬ 
more,  who  have  excited  such  a  deep  interest  in  the  cause  of 
temperance  in  other  places.  .  .  .  Mr.  Hawkins,  of  Baltimore, 
was  the  second  of  the  “Reformed  Drunkards”  introduced  to  the 
meeting.  He  was  a  man  forty-four  years  of  age — of  fine  manly 
form — and  said  he  had  been  more  than  twenty  years  a  confirmed 
inebriate.  He  spoke  with  rather  more  fluency,  force  and  effect, 
than  his  predecessor,  but  in  the  same  vein  of  free  and  easy, 
off-hand,  direct,  bang-up  style;  at  times  in  a  simple  conversa¬ 
tional  manner,  then  earnest  and  vehement,  then  pathetic,  then 
humorous — but  always  manly  and  reasonable.  Mr.  Hawkins 
succeeded  in  “working  up”  his  audience  finely.  Now  the  house 
was  as  quiet  and  still  as  a  deserted  church,  and  anon  the  high 
dome  rang  with  violent  bursts  of  laughter  and  applause.  Now 
he  assumed  the  melting  mood,  and  pictured  the  scenes  of  a 
drunkard’s  home,  and  that  home  his  own,  and  fountains  of  gen¬ 
erous  feeling,  in  many  hearts,  gushed  forth  in  tears — and  again, 
in  a  moment,  as  he  related  some  ludicrous  story,  these  tearful 
eyes  glistened  with  delight,  sighs  changed  to  hearty  shouts,  and 
long  faces  were  convulsed  with  broad  grins  and  glorious  smiles.7 

The  skill  with  which  Hawkins  played  upon  the  emotions 
of  his  hearers  was  signally  demonstrated  a  few  days  later 
when  he  addressed  an  audience  that  filled  even  the  standing 
room  in  Faneuil  Hall.  The  historic  building,  draped  in 
mourning  for  the  services  in  memory  of  President  Harrison, 

s  Extracts  from  Hawkins’  diary  in  W.  G.  Hawkins’  Life  of  John 
H.  W.  Hawkins,  pp.  81-82. 

7  Boston  Daily  Mail,  April  16,  1841, 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


188 

was  a  fitting  setting,  the  speaker  said,  for  the  obsequies  of 
old  King  Alcohol.  With  his  usual  repertoire  of  humorous 
and  pathetic  stories  Hawkins  carried  his  audience  from 
smiles  to  tears  and  back  again,  crowning  his  efforts  with  a 
recital  of  the  wickedness  of  his  unregenerate  days  and  the 
joy  that  followed  his  “moral  resurrection.”  As  he  concluded 
his  remarks,  men  in  the  audience  asked  permission  to  relate 
their  experiences,  and  the  meeting  closed  with  several  hundred 
moving  forward  to  sign  the  pledge.  Some  were  none  too 
steady  of  step  as  their  friends  urged  them  to  follow  Hawk¬ 
ins’  example.  It  was  truly  a  reformation  of  the  intemper¬ 
ate.  Those  who  had  doubted  whether  the  reformers  would 
be  able  to  repeat  their  triumphs  in  Boston  were  now  con¬ 
vinced  that  the  Washingtonian  appeal  was  as  effective  in 
Massachusetts  as  in  Maryland.8  So  encouraging  were  the 
results  of  the  meetings  that  the  Boston  Temperance  Society 
employed  Hawkins  to  devote  several  months  to  a  tour  of  the 
New  England  states.9 

The  Washingtonians  were  regarded  by  many  of  the  older 
organizations  as  valuable  allies  in  the  temperance  battle. 
They  were  highly  honoured  at  the  anniversary  meeting  of  the 
American  Temperance  Union  in  New  York  City,  May  11, 
1841,  and  two  months  later  at  Saratoga  Springs  they 
received  the  commendation  of  the  national  convention. 
Shortly  after  the  Saratoga  convention  a  delegation  of  the 
reformed  men  went  out,  two  by  two,  to  carry  their  message 
into  the  West  and  South.10  Some  of  these  temperance  teams 
achieved  a  fame  only  to  be  exceeded  later  by  the  evangelists, 
Moody  and  Sankey.  Pollard  and  Wright 11  began  their  cir¬ 
cuit  in  central  and  western  New  York,  where  results  were 

8  Boston  Mercantile  Journal,  April  22,  1841;  Journal,  May,  1842, 
p.  73. 

9  W.  G.  Hawkins,  op.  cit.,  pp.  109-110. 

10  Journal,  September,  1841,  p.  138. 

11  J.  F.  Pollard  and  W.  E.  Wright  of  Baltimore. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL 


189 

far  from  encouraging.  They  persevered,  however,  and  soon 
were  cordially  welcomed  wherever  they  went.  During  the 
summer  and  autumn  they  toured  New  York,  New  Jersey  and 
Pennsylvania,  securing  more  than  23,000  signatures  to  the 
pledge.  Their  meetings  normally  followed  the  type  which 
had  become  so  well  known  in  Washingtonian  circles.  One 
of  their  converts  has  left  us  this  description: 

Some  of  the  meetings  took  the  air  of  deep  religious  solemnity, 
eyes  that  never  wept  before  were  suffused,  and  hearts  from  which 
all  feelings  seemed  to  have  departed,  were  suddenly  converted 
into  flesh.  The  simple  tale  of  the  ruined  inebriate,  interrupted 
by  a  silence  that  told  of  emotions  too  big  fox  utterance,  would 
awaken  general  sympathy,  and  dissolve  a  large  portion  of  the 
audience  in  tears.  The  spell  which  had  bound  so  many  seemed 
to  dissolve  under  the  magic  eloquence  of  those  unlettered  men. 
They  spoke  from  the  heart  to  the  heart.  The  drunkard  found 
himself  unexpectedly  an  object  of  interest.  He  was  no  longer 
an  outcast.  There  were  some  who  still  looked  upon  him  as  a 
man.  A  chord  was  reached  which  had  long  since  ceased  to 
respond  to  other  influences  less  kind  in  their  nature.  ...  A  few 
leaders  in  the  ranks  of  intemperance  having  signed  the  pledge, 
it  appeared  to  be  the  signal  for  the  mass  to  follow:  and  on  they 
came,  like  a  torrent  sweeping  everything  before  it.  It  was  for 
weeks  the  all-absorbing  topic.  Men  and  women  went  hand 
in  hand  to  the  work;  and  day  after  day  the  evening  sun  set  upon 
the  crowd  standing  in  the  open  places  of  our  city  to  listen  to  the 
arguments  and  appeals  of  the  temperance  advocate.12 

Leaving  behind  them  hundreds  of  enthusiastic  supporters, 
Pollard  and  Wright  journeyed  south  through  Maryland  and 
Delaware  into  Virginia.  The  spring  of  1842  found  them 
conducting  meetings  in  Charlottesville,  Richmond  and 
Petersburg,  where  considerable  work  was  done  among  the 

12  P.  T.  D.,  II,  306-307.  The  account  was  given  by  a  correspondent 
living  in  Hudson,  N.  Y. 


190  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

Negroes.13  At  Charlottesville  students  of  the  University  of 
Virginia  organized  one  of  the  largest  and  most  aggressive 
societies  in  the  state.14 

In  the  meantime  Vickers  and  Small,15  having  started  into 
the  West,  selected  Pittsburgh  as  their  first  important  ob¬ 
jective.  They  found  that  intemperance  was  general  among 
the  labouring  population  of  the  rapidly  developing  industrial 
centre,  but  they  were  able  to  win  several  thousand  for  the 
cause  of  total  abstinence.16  From  their  success  in  Pitts¬ 
burgh  Vickers  and  Small  proceeded  to  Wheeling  and  then  to 
Cincinnati,  where  they  received  the  hearty  co-operation  of 
Lyman  Beecher,  then  president  of  Lane  Theological  Sem¬ 
inary.  Due  to  the  excellent  preliminary  work  which  had 
been  done,  the  Washingtonians  addressed  large  crowds  during 
the  entire  stay  in  the  city  and  secured  a  number  of  disciples 
who  were  willing  to  carry  the  message  into  neighbouring 
states.  Several  months,  therefore,  were  spent  in  organizing 
delegations  and  planning  itineraries  for  future  work  in  Ohio, 
Kentucky,  Tennessee,  Indiana  and  Illinois.  The  actual  ex¬ 
ecution  of  the  plans  was  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  Cincin¬ 
nati  societies  which  had  adopted  Washingtonian  principles.17 

Of  all  the  self-appointed  orators  and  lecturers  who  rose  up 
during  this  phase  of  the  reform  John  H.  W.  Hawkins  was 
easily  the  most  widely  known  and  the  most  successful.  He 
was  an  unusual  representative  of  many  hundreds  of  drunk¬ 
ards  who  were  reformed  by  the  ministrations  of  Washington¬ 
ians.  Born  of  English  parents  in  the  city  of  Baltimore, 
September  28,  1797,  Hawkins  was  early  deprived  of  the  home 

13  Richmond  Whig,  Jan.  28,  Feb.  8,  Feb.  13,  1842;  Journal,  March, 
1842,  p.  44.  The  Washingtonians  were  not  the  first  to  organize  societies 
among  the  Negroes.  In  1831  the  Georgians  had  already  established 
several  groups  under  the  guidance  of  other  societies.  Georgia  Journal, 
June,  1831. 

Journal,  March,  1842,  p.  44. 

is  Jesse  Vickers  and  Jesse  W.  Small  of  Baltimore. 

16  IV.  7.  Tribune,  June  25,  1841. 

17  Journal,  October,  1841,  p.  157, 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  191 

influence  by  being  bound  out  as  an  apprentice  to  a  hat-maker. 
His  master’s  establishment  was  “as  perfect  a  grog-shop  as 
ever  existed.”  Here  the  boy  learned  to  drink,  developing  a 
fondness  for  intoxicants  which  was  not  corrected  by  his  relig¬ 
ious  conversion  in  1815.  At  the  conclusion  of  his  appren¬ 
ticeship,  three  years  in  the  frontier  communities  of  the  Ohio 
valley  only  served  to  send  him  far  along  the  path  of  the 
prodigal  son.  Conquering  his  bad  habits  for  a  time,  he  re¬ 
turned  to  Baltimore  to  follow  his  trade,  but  the  next  twenty 
years  were  a  losing  battle  against  intemperance.  His  “re¬ 
lapses”  became  more  frequent  and  of  longer  duration  as  the 
years  passed,  while  his  family  endured  the  miseries  of  pov¬ 
erty.  The  failure  of  his  employer  dui-ing  the  financial  and 
industrial  depression  of  1837  was  disastrous  for  Hawkins. 
Unemployment  added  to  intemperance  forced  him  to  seek 
public  aid.  For  almost  three  years  he  was  unable  to  pro¬ 
vide  a  decent  home  for  his  family,  a  fact  which  so  preyed 
upon  his  mind,  when  he  was  sober,  that  he  more  often 
sought  the  comfort  of  intoxication.  Such  was  Hawkins’ 
condition  when  the  vigilant  workers  of  the  Washington  Tem¬ 
perance  Society  in  Baltimore  persuaded  him  to  sign  the  total 
abstinence  pledge.18  It  did  not  take  his  associates  long  to 
discover  that  he  had  the  qualities  of  a  leader.  A  splendid 
physique  and  commanding  presence,  combined  with  a  gift  for 
extemporaneous  speaking,  made  him  an  ideal  lecturer.  Dur¬ 
ing  his  first  week  as  a  Washingtonian  he  began  a  missionary 
campaign  among  his  old  companions.  He  was  not  so  success¬ 
ful,  however,  in  his  personal  visits  to  the  unregenerate  as  in 
his  appeals  from  the  platform.  His  ability  to  tell  a  story 
well,  his  judicious  mingling  of  anecdote  and  argument  and 
his  understanding  of  the  psychology  of  a  crowd  gave  him  an 
unusual  mastery  over  large  audiences. 

A  less  robust  body  could  not  have  endured  the  exacting 
labours  which  John  Hawkins  undertook  after  1840.  Al¬ 
ls  W.  G.  Hawkins,  op.  cit.,  pp.  3—65. 


192  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

though  New  England  was  his  special  field  for  a  few  years, 
within  a  decade  he  had  been  called  into  every  section  of  the 
country.  In  1842  he  visited  Washington  in  a  successful  at¬ 
tempt  to  revive  the  Congressional  Temperance  Society  and 
reorganize  it  on  a  total  abstinence  basis.  The  following 
year  he  left  Massachusetts  long  enough  to  tour  the  western 
and  northern  counties  of  New  York,  as  well  as  parts  of  Ver¬ 
mont,  New  Hampshire  and  Maine.  In  November  he  ar¬ 
ranged  an  itinerary  through  the  South,  which  took  him  to 
the  principal  cities  in  the  Carolinas  and  Georgia.  Forced 
to  return  to  Boston  before  his  swing  around  the  circle  was 
complete,  he  undertook  a  western  trip  in  the  autumn  of 
1845.  Having  visited  towns  in  Ohio,  Indiana  and  Illinois, 
he  started  down  the  Mississippi  in  the  spring  of  1846,  con¬ 
cluding  his  campaign  with  remarkable  revivals  in  New  Or¬ 
leans  and  Mobile.  Hawkins’  journal  indicates  that  for  eight 
consecutive  months  he  spoke  at  least  once  each  day,  besides 
supervising  the  work  of  his  numerous  assistants.  Wherever 
he  lectured,  he  endeavoured  to  effect  an  organization  which 
would  carry  on  the  work  after  he  had  departed  for  another 
district.  It  is  estimated  that  in  his  first  ten  years  as  a  re¬ 
former  Hawkins  travelled  more  than  100,000  miles  and  de¬ 
livered  as  many  as  2500  addresses,  a  record  scarcely 
equalled  by  the  most  peripatetic  Chautauqua  lecturer  of 
to-day.10 

Hawkins’  greatest  rival  as  a  temperance  orator  was  John 
Bartholomew  Gough.  Like  Hawkins  he  was  a  reformed 
drunkard,  but  he  did  not  attribute  his  reformation  to  the 
work  of  the  Washingtonians.  He  was,  however,  in  sympathy 
with  the  new  movement.  At  the  age  of  twelve  Gough  was 
sent  by  his  parents,  then  living  at  Sandgate,  Kent,  England, 
to  learn  a  trade  in  the  United  States.  The  family  in  whose 

is  W.  G.  Hawkins,  op.  tit.,  pp.  156-326.  In  his  biography  of  his  father 
W.  G.  Hawkins  quotes  frequently  from  letters  and  journals  written 
during  the  course  of  these  lecture  trips.  See  also  N.  Y.  Tribune, 
June  2,  1841;  Delaware  Gazette,  February  18,  1842. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  193 

care  he  was  entrusted  settled  on  a  farm  near  Utica,  New 
York,  where  the  boy  was  forced  to  perform  the  ordinary 
farm  chores.  Dissatisfied,  because  he  was  allowed  neither  to 
learn  a  trade  nor  to  attend  school,  he  finally  secured  his 
father’s  permission  to  leave  the  farm  and  seek  work  in  New 
York  City.20  There  he  entered  upon  an  apprenticeship  in  a 
cheap  book-bindery  in  the  winter  of  1831.  His  mother  came 
from  England  to  be  with  her  fourteen  year  old  son,  but  she 
died  shortly  after  her  arrival,  leaving  the  boy  disheartened 
and  disconsolate.  He  sought  relief  from  his  loneliness  in  the 
sociability  of  the  grog-shops  and  tippling-houses,  where  he 
met  a  number  of  young  people  whose  reckless  pastimes  in¬ 
terested  him.  During  the  next  few  years  dissolute  habits 
grew  upon  him,  though  he  managed  to  work  regularly  at 
his  trade.  In  the  meantime  he  was  married.  When  the 
panic  of  1837,  by  wrecking  the  financial  fortunes  of  his  em¬ 
ployer,  threw  him  out  of  work,  he  tried  to  make  a  living  in  the 
theatre.  For  a  time  he  played  low  comedy  parts  along  the 
Bowery,  and  later  his  ability  as  a  mimic  earned  him  a  chance 
with  a  company  of  strolling  minstrels.  His  theatrical  career 
ended  abruptly  when  the  minstrel  company  left  him  in 
Worcester,  Massachusetts,  to  recover  from  an  attack  of 
delirium  tremens.  His  wife,  wrho  was  ill  at  the  time,  came  to 
Worcester  to  nurse  him,  but  did  not  live  to  see  her  husband’s 
20  The  references  to  his  boyhood,  which  Gough  later  incorporated  in 
some  of  his  speeches,  were  distorted  so  as  to  make  it  appear  that  he 
had  been  ungrateful  to  the  family  that  brought  him  to  the  United  States. 
The  matter  aroused  the  resentment  of  the  Mannering  family,  and  in 
1845  a  pamphlet  appeared  in  New  York  entitled  The  Echo  of  Truth, 
or  John  B.  Gough’s  Early  History,  By  His  Foster-Father.  It  was 
written  by  Jesse  Pound,  pastor  of  St.  Matthew’s  Church  and  a  close 
friend  of  the  Mannerings.  Pound  insisted  that  Gough  was  guilty  of 
slander  and  was  lightening  the  pockets  of  the  public  by  falsely  playing 
upon  its  sympathy.  In  answer  to  this  charge  Gough  denied  that  he 
had  been  correctly  quoted  in  the  press.  He  branded  the  rumour  that 
he  had  been  made  a  drunkard  by  the  Mannerings  as  untrue,  but  he 
refused  to  withdraw  his  statement  that  he  had  not  received  proper 
treatment  while  working  on  the  Mannering  farm.  The  question  was  one 
of  veracity,  and  the  public  could  draw  its  own  conclusions. 


194  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

recovery.  After  his  wife’s  death  Gough  found  his  chief 
solace  in  the  lowest  grog-shops,  where  he  amused  the  loafers 
with  his  songs  and  stories,  taking  his  pay  in  the  form  of 
treats.  Occasionally  he  worked  at  his  old  trade  in  a  local 
book-bindery.21 

In  October,  1842,  Joel  Stratton,  an  employee  of  the  tem¬ 
perance  hotel  in  Worcester,  persuaded  John  B.  Gough  to 
sign  the  pledge.  It  was  not  at  first 'apparent  that  the  young 
temperance  recruit  would  develop  into  one  of  the  most  popu¬ 
lar  lecturers  of  his  day.  Gough’s  notoriety  as  a  drunkard, 
however,  made  his  reformation  the  more  interesting,  and  the 
societies  in  Worcester  desired  his  services.  For  a  few 
months  he  confined  his  efforts  to  an  occasional  relation  of  his 
experiences,  usually  speaking  to  a  small  audience  in  some 
neighbouring  town.  As  the  demands  upon  his  time  increased 
he  quit  his  job  in  the  publishing  house  in  order  to  enter  seri¬ 
ously  on  the  work  of  a  reformer.  During  this  probationary 
period,  five  months  after  he  had  signed  the  pledge,  Gough 
suffered  his  first  relapse,  a  weakness  which  was  destined  to 
interfere  with  his  work  at  a  later  date.  On  this  particular 
occasion  he  confessed  to  the  Worcester  society  that  he  had 
violated  the  pledge,  expressed  his  sorrow  and  penitence  and 
was  forgiven.  In  the  summer  of  1843  he  made  his  debut  in 
Boston,  where  he  was  so  cordially  received  that  he  decided  to 
undertake  an  extensive  tour  of  the  New  England  states.  On 
this  tour  he  made  383  public  addresses  and  received  through 
voluntary  contributions  $1059,  out  of  which  he  paid  all  ex¬ 
penses.  In  four  years  his  travels  amounted  to  6840  miles, 
and  he  counted  his  reward  in  15,218  signatures  to  the  pledge. 
It  was  evident  to  the  young  reformer  and  his  associates 
that  he  had  found  his  life  work.22 

In  September,  1845,  wyhile  on  a  visit  to  New  York  City, 

2 1  Autobiograjihy  and  Personal  Recollections  of  John  B.  Gough,  pp. 
20-127.  See  also  Carlos  Martyn,  John  B.  Gough,  The  Apostle  of  Cold 
Water. 

22  Gough,  Autobiography ,  pp.  160-161. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  195 

Gough  suddenly  disappeared.  His  friends,  fearing  foul 
play,  conducted  a  diligent  search  and  finally  located  him  in 
a  house  of  ill-repute  in  Walker  Street.  He  was  evidently  re¬ 
covering  from  a  drunken  debauch  which  had  lasted  the 
greater  part  of  a  week.  As  soon  as  he  was  able,  he  issued 
a  public  statement  explaining  his  actions.  According  to  his 
version  of  the  affair,  he  had  been  accosted  on  the  street  by  a 
chance  acquaintance,  wThose  name  he  could  not  remember, 
who  had  invited  him  to  have  a  glass  of  soda  at  a  nearby 
drug  store.  After  drinking  the  soda,  so  the  statement  read, 
he  became  dazed,  lost  his  way  and  wandered  aimlessly 
through  streets  that  he  had  never  seen  before.  How  he 
reached  the  house  in  Walker  Street  he  could  not  explain. 
He  did  not  remember  whether  he  had  taken  any  liquor  after 
the  first  glass  of  soda  or  not.  He  would  plead  guilty  to 
violation  of  the  pledge  and  throw  himself  on  the  mercy  of 
his  friends.  He  believed  that  his  misfortune  was  traceable 
to  intoxicants  or  drugs  in  what  he  thought  was  a  harmless 
social  glass.23  The  incident  was  the  subject  of  much  dis¬ 
cussion  and  newspaper  comment.24  Gough’s  enemies  were 
jubilant,  believing  that  his  reputation  had  been  ruined. 
They  charged  him  with  drunkenness  and  disorderly  conduct 
and  with  publishing  a  false  explanation  of  that  conduct.20 
The  temperance  press  generally  accepted  Gough’s  statement 
and  found  in  his  experience  only  one  more  proof  of  the  evil 
power  of  the  liquor  dealers.  Some  of  the  Washingtonian 
journals,  however,  doubting  Gough’s  sincerity,  were  severe 
in  their  condemnation  of  a  man  who  could  be  so  easily  led 

23  ibid,.,  pp.  195-209. 

24  In  New  York  the  Herald,  ever  opposed  to  temperance,  was  in  an 
ecstasy  of  joy;  the  Tribune  was  unconvinced  by  Gough’s  statement, 
but  was  charitably  inclined  toward  him;  the  Commercial  Advertiser 
openly  defended  Gough.  The  Massachusetts  Spy,  a  strong  supporter  of 
temperance,  was  non-committal.  See  Anti-Slavery  Bugle,  Sept.  26,  1845. 

25  For  specimens  of  the  attacks  on  Gough’s  veracity  see  Goffiana: 
A  Review  of  the  Life  and  Writings  of  John  B.  Gough  (1846). 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


196 

astray.26  In  spite  of  the  publicity  given  to  this  indiscretion, 
Gough’s  popularity  did  not  wane.  His  services  were  so 
greatly  in  demand  that  for  the  next  five  years  towns  in  every 
section  of  the  country  were  on  his  waiting  list. 

The  secret  of  Gough’s  power  as  a  public  speaker  is  not 
revealed  in  his  printed  addresses,  for  it  was  more  his  manner 
of  delivery  than  the  substance  of  his  discourse  that  won  his 
audience.27  His  arguments,  when  read  to-day,  sound  rather 
forced,  and  many  of  his  anecdotes  are  surprisingly  pointless. 
Contemporary  reporters  of  his  speeches  seem  to  have  realized 
that  the  printed  page  was  an  inadequate  record  of  his  elo¬ 
quence,  for  they  frequently  lament  their  inability  to  repro¬ 
duce  his  vigour  of  utterance.28  Enthusiastic  admirers  de¬ 
scribed  his  voice  as  a  “noble  instrument  of  many  keys”  upon 
which  he  played  melodies  that  charmed  his  hearers.  Few 
who  heard  him,  even  if  they  did  not  agree  with  his  message, 
failed  to  pay  tribute  to  his  intense  earnestness,  his  impas¬ 
sioned  delivery  and  his  sure  sense  of  the  dramatic.  Describ¬ 
ing  him  at  the  beginning  of  his  public  career,  a  correspond¬ 
ent  to  the  New  York  Observer  wrote : 

Mr.  Gough  now  rose,  a  youth  of  a  pale  countenance,  bordering 
even  on  pensiveness,  personally  a  stranger  to  us  all,  and  burdened 
with  a  reputation  for  eloquence,  which  it  seemed  difficult  for 
him  much  longer  to  carry.  But  oh,  that  conciliatory  exordium ! 
Was  it  the  power  of  nature,  or  was  it  the  perfection  of  art? 
There  was  art  in  it,  but  it  was  learned,  not  in  the  school  of  the 

28  Journal,  October,  1845,  p.  162.  The  Journal  for  December,  1845, 
contains  the  report  of  a  special  committee  from  the  Mount  Vernon 
Church  in  Boston,  of  which  Mr.  Gough  was  a  member,  completely 
exonerating  him.  See  also  a  pamphlet  in  his  defence,  A  Minute  and 
Authentic  Narrative  of  the  Conduct  and  Conversation  of  John  B. 
Gough  during  each  day  of  his  late  absence  (1845). 

2?  See  J.  B.  Gough,  Platform  Echoes,  or  Leaves  from  My  Notebook 
of  Forty  Years. 

28  Journal,  February,  1845,  p.  17,  April,  p.  51. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  197 

Rhetorician,  but  of  Nature.  It  was  indeed  an  ingenuous  dis¬ 
avowal  of  all  claim  to  the  character  of  an  instructor,  or  to  the 
gifts  of  a  well-furnished  public  speaker.  As  to  education,  his 
audience  had  doubtless  enjoyed  advantages  superior  to  himself, 
he  said,  since  he  had  never  been  at  school.  This  deference  to 
his  audience,  composed  of  the  flower  of  an  intelligent  city, 
combined  with  the  unaffected  modesty  of  his  demeanor  in  all 
things  touching  himself,  opened  a  clear  way  for  the  march  of  his 
oratory.  We  were  now  prepared  to  go  with  him  into  any  field 
he  might  select.  The  wand  of  the  magician  began  to  exert  its 
influence,  the  magician  himself  the  while  seeming  to  be  un¬ 
conscious  of  the  waxing  power  of  his  enchantment.  .  .  .  All 
were  under  the  spell  of  this  young  charmer,  who  charmed  so 
wisely;  alternately  elevated  by  the  grand,  thrilled  with  the 
horrible,  dissolved  with  the  tender,  enchanted  with  the  beautiful, 
and  all  this  without  a  plan  or  a  purpose  on  the  part  of  the 
speaker,  except  to  try  to  rescue  the  fallen  from  the  pit  and  the 
mire  of  intemperance,  and  invigorate  the  principles  of  those  who 
stand  on  firm  ground.29 

The  pale,  pensive  youth  lost  none  of  his  power  as  his  years 
of  platform  experience  increased.  Though  he  generally 
used  the  vernacular  of  the  uneducated,  he  never  shocked  the 
sensibilities  of  his  hearers  with  vulgarities  nor  sought  to 
arouse  passion  by  bitter  denunciation.  A  gift  of  mimicry, 
first  cultivated  while  he  was  playing  low  comedy  parts  on  the 
Bowery,  won  many  a  critical  audience  and  made  him  a  great 
favourite  with  the  children,  whose  praise  was  the  great  guar¬ 
antee  of  his  future  fame. 

In  the  meantime  a  host  of  orators  and  organizers,  in¬ 
glorious  in  comparison  with  Hawkins  and  Gough,  but 
charged  with  something  of  their  energy,  were  reaping  a 
bountiful  harvest  for  the  Washingtonian  societies.  Reports 
from  every  field  of  activity  emphasized  the  unusual  success 
29  Letter  of  Rev.  J.  N.  Danforth  to  the  New  York  Observer.  Copied 
in  Journal ,  April,  1845,  pp.  51-52. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


198 

of  the  new  phase  of  the  reform.  In  1843,  if  we  may  credit 
the  figures  recorded  in  the  enthusiasm  of  the  moment,  a  half 
million  intemperate  drinkers  and  one  hundred  thousand  habit¬ 
ual  drunkards  had  been  persuaded  to  sign  the  pledge.30 
The  changes  wrought  in  some  communities,  said  the  reports, 
surpassed  “all  the  marvelous  tales  of  fiction.”  Of  all  tem¬ 
perance  statistics,  however,  these  were  the  most  unreliable, 
for  few  of  the  “mushroom”  societies  kept  permanent  records. 
Still,  the  lack  of  an  accurate  enumeration  does  not  alter  the 
fact  that  Washingtonianism  was  sweeping  the  country. 
From  every  state  came  word  that  in  a  few  years  the  “re¬ 
formed  drunkards”  had  done  as  much  good  as  the  older 
societies  in  their  fifteen  years  of  organized  effort.  Not  only 
were  inebriates  being  reformed,  but  moderate  drinkers  were 
abandoning  moderation  and  accepting  total  abstinence  as 
the  correct  principle  of  conduct.  The  press  was  devoting  a 
greater  amount  of  news  space  to  temperance,  while  editorials 
on  the  subject  were  couched  in  more  laudatory  terms.31 
Certainly,  if  publicity  was  any  criterion,  the  revival  that 
came  out  of  Baltimore  was  arousing  the  public  to  action. 

The  Washingtonians,  possibly  taking  their  cue  from  the 
methods  of  the  political  parties  in  the  election  of  1840,  used 
mass  demonstrations  frequently  and  effectively  to  keep  up 
the  morale  of  the  movement.  Washington’s  Birthday,  the 
Fourth  of  July,  and  the  anniversary  of  the  formation  of  the 
first  society  were  occasions  for  parades,  open  air  meetings, 
picnics,  fairs  and  bazaars.  Several  times  each  year  in  the 
larger  cities  the  total  strength  of  the  temperance  societies 

so  These  figures  included  the  results  of  three  years’  work,  1841-1843. 

si  For  press  notices  concerning  the  success  of  Washingtonianism  see 
Providence  Daily  Journal,  Oct.  20,  1842;  Manufacturers  and  Farmers 
Journal,  July  12,  1841;  Delaware  Gazette,  Jan.  21,  1842,  Feb.  3,  1843; 
Baltimore  Patriot,  Feb.  10,  Sept.  16,  1842,  March  8,  1843;  Richmond 
Enquirer,  May  21,  1841;  N.  7.  Tribune,  July  5,  1841;  Maysville  (Ky.) 
Eagle,  Feb.  26,  1842;  Indiana  State  Sentinel,  April  17,  1845;  Alton 
(Ill.)  Telegraph,  May  14,  1842. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  199 

was  marshalled  for  an  impressive  procession.32  A  typical 
demonstration  of  this  character  was  the  celebration  held  in 
Boston  on  May  30,  1844.  Committees  from  the  various 
Washingtonian  societies,  responsible  for  the  arrangements, 
made  every  effort  to  secure  the  co-operation  of  all  tem¬ 
perance  organizations  in  Massachusetts  and  neighbouring 
states.  As  a  result  of  this  effective  preliminary  work  many 
county  societies  sent  large  delegations  to  the  city,  where 
they  joined  similar  delegations  from  societies  in  Connecticut, 
Rhode  Island  and  New  Hampshire.  The  city  was  in  gala 
attire  for  the  occasion.  Banks  were  closed,  and  most  busi¬ 
ness  houses  arranged  for  a  half-holiday.  Before  noon  thou¬ 
sands  of  visitors  had  found  vantage  points  from  which  to 
view  the  parade.  Promptly  at  twelve  the  procession  moved 
from  the  State  House  down  Beacon  street  to  Park.  It  was 
formed  in  twenty-three  sections,  each  headed  by  a  brass  band. 
The  Washington  Light  Infantry,  composed  entirely  of  total 
abstainers,  served  as  an  honorary  escort.  The  various 
societies  marched  under  their  distinctive  banners,  and  the  in¬ 
dividual  members  wore  badges  or  ribbons  indicating  the 
group  with  which  they  were  affiliated.  As  the  line  moved 
forward,  it  was  apparent  that  one  of  the  Catholic  societies 
in  Boston,  St.  Mary’s  Mutual  Benevolent  Total  Abstinence 
Society,  was  represented  by  the  largest  delegation.  Here  and 
there  among  the  marchers  appeared  interesting  floats  which 
attested  the  ingenuity  of  several  enthusiastic  organizations. 
The  South  Boston  Washington  Society  presented  a  moss- 
covered  well  with  two  men  drawing  buckets  of  cool  water 

32  For  interesting  items  regarding  these  temperance  celebrations  see 
the  following:  Providence  Daily  Journal,  Jan.  21,  Feb.  23,  25,  1842; 
Delaware  Gazette,  April  8,  15,  1842;  Baltimore  Patriot,  Jan.  3,  1842, 
April  3,  1843;  N.  Y.  Tribune,  Feb.  23,  1842;  Richmond  Whig,  July 
4,  6,  1842;  Cleveland  Plain  Dealer,  Feb.  22,  1849;  Diary  of  Philip  Hone, 
II,  80;  A.  D.  P.  Van  Buren,  “That  Glorious  Fourth,”  Pioneer  Society  of 
Michigan,  Collections,  V,  422-426.  Fairs  and  bazaars,  similar  to  the 
anti-slavery  fairs,  were  designed  to  raise  money  for  the  cause. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


200 

from  its  depths.  The  Naval  Washington  Society  came  with 
a  full-rigged  ship,  while  the  New  Bedford  society  members 
manned  a  sturdy  whale-boat  to  the  plaudits  of  the  specta¬ 
tors. 

As  the  procession  passed  down  the  Mall,  boys  and  girls  of 
the  Cold  Water  Army  took  their  places  on  either  side  of  the 
line  of  march,  making  a  pretty  sight  in  their  blue  and  white 
uniforms.  Whenever  possible,  they  sang  temperance  songs 
to  the  tunes  played  by  the  bands  as  they  marched  by.  The 
procession’s  destination  was  Boston  Common  where  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  ladies’  societies  awaited  its  arrival.  As  soon  as 
the  first  marchers  came  into  view,  the  women  joined  in  the 
chorus  of  “The  Teetotalers  Are  Coming,”  which  was  taken 
up  by  the  entire  multitude  that  had  assembled  for  the 
speeches.  The  oration  of  the  afternoon,  lauding  the  work 
of  the  Washingtonians,  was  delivered  by  Governor  George 
N.  Briggs  who  had  long  been  active,  as  a  member  of  the 
House,  in  the  Congressional  Temperance  Society  at  Wash¬ 
ington.  After  the  exercises  on  the  Common  were  finished, 
picnic  suppers  were  served  in  several  parts  of  the  city,  and 
many  delegates  remained  for  an  evening  meeting  at  Tremont 
Temple  which  was  addressed  by  Governor  Briggs,  William 
K.  Mitchell  and  John  B.  Gough.  For  at  least  one  day  Bos¬ 
ton  had  been  in  the  hands  of  the  temperance  forces.33 

An  account  of  the  Boston  celebration  published  in  the 
Journal  of  the  American  Temperance  Union  concluded  with 
this  sentence:  “We  regretted  that  the  old  Massachusetts 
Temperance  Society,  and  the  Massachusetts  Temperance 
Union,  were  not  seen  as  such  in  the  procession.”  Unim¬ 
portant  as  the  statement  may  seem  at  first  glance,  it  is  a 
significant  indication  of  a  serious  problem  that  confronted 
the  reformers.  Under  the  compulsion  of  popular  demand 
many  of  the  old  societies  had  employed  Washingtonian 

sb  Gough,  Autobiography,  pp.  177-182;  Journal,  June,  1814,  p.  96, 
July,  pp.  105-107. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  201 

speakers  to  revive  a  waning  interest,  but  they  had  been  dis¬ 
appointed  that  the  new  pledge-signers  could  seldom  be  per¬ 
suaded  to  join  existing  organizations.  Wherever  Washing¬ 
tonian  workers  conducted  campaigns,  it  was  necessary  either 
to  form  a  new  society  officered  by  reformed  men,  or  to  con¬ 
vert  the  old  group  into  a  Washington  abstinence  society. 
To  some  who  had  laboured  long  in  temperance  work,  it  seemed 
unwise  to  abandon  organizations  which  had  been  in  existence 
ten  or  fifteen  years  in  favour  of  a  new  and  untried  principle. 
It  appeared  to  them  that  the  Washingtonians  had  no  in¬ 
terest  in  the  triumphs  of  the  struggle  prior  to  1840.  The 
younger  movement  seemed  to  be  unwilling  to  learn  anything 
from  the  older.  Its  membership  scoffed  at  the  methods  and 
principles  formerly  held  in  esteem.  A  movement  was  on  foot, 
said  some  conservatives,  to  substitute  noisy  and  sensational 
demonstrations  for  systematic,  educational  propaganda. 
Emotion  was  supplanting  reason.  The  old  leaders  were  be¬ 
ing  set  aside.  Any  Tom,  Dick  or  Harry  could  direct  the 
course  of  the  reform.34  Washingtonian  “Heralds,”  “Stand¬ 
ards”  and  “Advocates”  were  springing  up  everywhere,  living 
just  long  enough  to  cripple  the  recognized  journals,  and 
then  expiring  from  lack  of  funds.  Their  existence  was  too 
often  marked  by  unpleasant  controversies  with  other  tem¬ 
perance  periodicals.  The  Washingtonians,  on  the  other 
hand,  charged  that  the  older  societies  refused  to  co-operate 
with  them,  criticized  their  methods  and  ridiculed  their  prin¬ 
ciples.35 

Although  this  mutual  resentment  was  not  universal,  it 

34  For  evidences  of  this  distrust  of  the  Washingtonian  movement  see: 
Journal,  October,  184-1,  p.  156,  November,  pp.  171-172,  January,  1842, 
p.  6,  July,  p.  104;  Cleveland  Herald,  March  9,  1842.  Cf.  Marsh,  op.  cit., 
pp.  174-175;  Jewett,  op.  cit.,  pp.  29-30;  Dorchester,  op.  cit.,  pp.  271-272. 

35  Washingtonian  scorn  for  the  efforts  of  the  older  societies  is  re¬ 
vealed  by  sarcastic  statements  in  the  New  York  Organ  and  the  New 
England  Washingtonian.  See  extracts  copied  in  Journal,  August,  1844, 
p.  124. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


202 

developed  into  a  distinction  between  “old”  and  “new”  soci¬ 
eties  which  seriously  interfered  with  harmonious  action. 
One  heresy  charged  against  the  Washingtonians  was  that 
they  repudiated  all  connection  with  organized  religion  and 
denied  that  their  reform  was  based  on  Christian  principles. 
Those  who  pressed  the  charge  asserted  that  no  Washington¬ 
ian  meeting  was  ever  opened  with  prayer,  that  ministers  were 
seldom  invited  to  speak  and  that  some  members  openly  pro¬ 
claimed  their  atheism.  These  accusations  were  greatly  over¬ 
drawn.  It  was  true  that  many  reformed  drunkards  and 
others,  who  had  signed  the  same  pledge,  were  neither  devout 
nor  deeply  interested  in  the  relation  between  religion  and 
reform.  They  were  indifferent  to  the  idea  that  their  re¬ 
formation  was  due  to  the  “hand  of  God  in  human  affairs.” 
They  spent  no  time  speculating  whether  they  would  be  able 
to  keep  their  pledge  without  relying  on  the  Almighty  for 
strength  and  guidance.  But  they  were  not  atheists.  The 
religious  aspect  of  the  situation  simply  did  not  interest  them. 
Only  a  few  of  the  extremists  among  them  denounced  the  in¬ 
troduction  of  religious  principles  into  a  secular  reform  as 
a  dangerous  manifestation  of  sectarianism.36 

These  extremists,  however,  were  so  vociferous  that  many 
Christians  came  to  regard  atheism  as  a  characteristic  feature 
of  the  Washingtonian  movement.37  Fearful  that  the  whole 
temperance  program  would  lose  the  support  of  devout  church 

so  The  distinction  between  “old”  and  “new”  societies  was  by  no 
means  sharply  defined.  Many  Washingtonians,  anxious  to  work  in 
harmony  with  the  older  groups,  found  the  existing  organizations  of 
great  value  to  them.  The  files  of  the  Columbia  Washingtonian,  pub¬ 
lished  at  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  for  1842  and  1843  indicate  that  signers  of  the 
new  pledge  were  of  many  minds  as  to  the  proper  way  to  promote 
temperance.  See  Columbia  Washingtonian,  March  16,  1843. 

37  Writing  of  the  situation  in  later  years,  John  B.  Gough  complained 
that  he  was  the  object  of  bitter  invective  in  certain  Washingtonian 
journals  because  he  insisted  that  temperance  was  based  on  piety  and 
urged  his  hearers  to  seek  divine  guidance  before  signing  the  pledge. 
Autobiography,  pp.  246—247;  Martyn,  op.  cit.,  pp.  115-117. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  203 

members,  the  editor  of  the  Journal  of  the  American  Temper¬ 
ance  Union  undertook  to  champion  the  cause  of  religion. 
After  the  autumn  of  1842  the  Journal's  columns  contained 
frequent  attacks  on  “men  of  infidel  and  wicked  minds”  who 
were  using  the  temperance  reform  to  arouse  opposition  to 
Christian  principles.38  A  statement  of  the  editor  of  the 
Essex  W ashingt onian  to  the  effect  that  if  Washingtonianism 
prevailed  the  religious  sects  would  “be  blown  to  the  moon” 
called  forth  this  comment : 

In  the  late  extraordinary  reformation  of  drunkards,  a  subject 
of  thankfulness,  however  transient,  but  more  especially  when 
resulting,  as  it  has  in  thousands  of  cases,  in  permanent  sobriety; 
a  deep  sympathy  was  felt  for  this  unfortunate  class — prejudiced 
against  religion  and  religious  men  by  long  absence  from  the 
Sabbath’s  influence  and  by  subjection  to  the  vile  and  debasing 
principles  of  the  bar-room  and  dram-shop.  To  induce  them  to 
sign  the  pledge,  these  prejudices,  it  was  supposed,  must  be 
consulted.  The  wharf,  the  market-house,  the  public  hall,  rather 
than  a  church,  must  be  the  place  of  meeting.  Under  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  a  glee  song,  an  animated  speech,  a  loud  huzza,  not 
deterred  or  thrown  back  by  any  gloomy  forms  of  religion  or  any 
presentation  of  moral  obligation,  they  must  be  induced  as 
gentlemen  to  come  up  and  sign  the  pledge.  .  .  .  That  the  ex¬ 
clusion  of  all  religious  forms  and  the  entire  abstraction  of 
religion  from  temperance,  was  necessary  for  the  reclamation 
of  the  drunkard,  we  have  never  believed.  There  can  be  no 
necessity  for  atheism  anywhere  in  this  world.  The  drunkard 
may  have  felt  hostile  to  religion  while  in  the  bar-room  and  amid 
the  fumes  of  liquor,  and  he  may  feel  so  after  he  has  reformed 
and  been  taught  to  believe  that  he  is  better  than  a  Christian, 
but  never  did  a  poor  drunkard  go  up  in  sincerity  to  sign  the 
pledge,  without  feeling  himself  a  prodigal,  commencing  a  work  of 
return  to  his  Heavenly  Father,  and  needing  that  Father’s  help; 
and  who  would  not  have  gratefully  knelt  and  listened  to  a  prayer 

38  Journal,  September,  1842,  p.  137,  October,  p.  152,  December, 
pp.  179,  182,  February,  1843,  pp.  17,  27, 


204  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

for  that  help  on  his  new  endeavors.  And  we  believe  that  if 
the  hundreds  of  thousands  of  signatures  in  our  country  had  been 
accompanied  with  prayer  and  some  religious  enforcement,  their 
power  and  efficiency  would  have  been  incomparably  stronger. 

.  .  .  We  trust  our  Washingtonian  friends  will  not  view  us  their 
enemies  for  this  exposure  of  the  arts  of  infidelity.  We  believe 
there  is  not  one  in  a  thousand  but  would  abhor  them,  if  they 
understood  them.  We  say  to  them,  cut  loose  from  them  all,  or 
they  will  prove  the  ruin  of  your  enterprise.  In  the  prevalence 
of  pure  Washingtonianism,  the  reformation  of  drunkards  and 
the  relief  of  the  miserable,  every  philanthropist,  every  patriot 
and  Christian  ought  to  rejoice,  but  when  the  unprincipled  im¬ 
prove  a  temperance  meeting  to  revile  the  Clergy,  the  Churches 
or  the  Magistracy,  they  should  receive  the  withering  rebuke  of 
every  virtuous  citizen.39 

Thus  did  John  Marsh  warn  his  associates  to  be  on  their 
guard.  Thirty  years  before  Lyman  Beecher  had  extolled 
the  temperance  reformers  as  strong  supporters  of  “the 
Clergy,  the  Churches  and  the  Magistracy,”  but  the  develop¬ 
ments  of  a  generation  had  carried  the  movement  far  from 
the  principles  of  the  pioneers. 

Controversies  over  the  religious  opinions  of  the  Washing¬ 
tonians  were  soon  overshadowed  by  the  more  important  ques¬ 
tion  of  their  attitude  toward  legislation.  We  have  seen  that 
prior  to  1840  a  considerable  portion  of  the  temperance 
forces  had  become  convinced  of  the  impossibility  of  driving 
intemperance  from  the  land  without  the  aid  of  legal  restric¬ 
tions  on  the  liquor  traffic.  This  group  was  keenly  disap¬ 
pointed  that  within  the  Washingtonian  movement  there  was 
developing  a  determined  opposition  to  the  enforcement  of 
temperance  by  statute.  With  an  unusual  consideration  for 
the  feelings  of  the  liquor  dealer  many  reformed  men  refused 
to  countenance  any  action  against  the  men  interested  in  the 

89  Journal,  April,  1844,  pp.  56-57, 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  205 
traffic.40  William  K.  Mitchell,  for  example,  championed  the 
cause  of  the  retailer  so  consistently  that  he  permitted  liquor 
dealers  to  sign  the  pledge  and  join  societies  which  he  or¬ 
ganized.41  Thomas  F.  Marshall,  Congressman  from  the 
Ashland  district  in  Kentucky,  was  particularly  vehement  in 
his  opposition  to  any  legislative  interference.42  In  a  speech 
at  the  Broadway  Tabernacle,  New  York,  on  May  4,  1842,  he 
sounded  a  warning  to  his  fellow  Washingtonians : 

Let  not  the  cause  of  Temperance — ye  who  are  members  of  its 
societies— ye  who  are  the  priests  of  Temperance  principles — let 
it  not  mingle  itself  with  any  other  cause  whatever.  Above  all 
things  on  earth,  eschew  all  political  alliance.  The  cause  is  too 
high  for  law.  Make  no  statutes,  nor  attempt  to  make  any,  on 
the  subject.  It  began  in  weakness — leave  it,  unaided  by  human 
enactments,  to  the  mighty  instruments  which  God  himself,  the 
author  of  this  great  revolution,  has  selected  in  the  first  instance 
as  the  means  of  its  support.  Let  politicians,  as  politicians,  and 
legislators,  alone.  If  they  join  you — as  some  have  done — O! 
in  God’s  name  open  your  arms  wide  to  receive  them !  but  don’t 
go  to  them.  Let  them  wage  their  factious  warfare.  Let  them 
vex  the  walls  of  the  national  Legislature,  and  weary  the  very 
atmosphere  with  the  din  of  their  party  contests.  Keep  the 
Temperance  ear  sealed  up  against  them!  Persecute  nobody. 
Look,  rather,  with  compassion  and  sympathy  on  the  unfortunate 
wretches  who  yet  have  not  power  to  break  their  chains ;  but  O ! 
don’t  make  laws  against  them !  God  knows  they  are  under  a  law 
hard  enough  already !  This  cause  is  too  high  for  law.43 

The  fact  that  Marshall  was  in  politics  in  Kentucky  may 

40  P.  T.  D.,  II,  Eighth  Report,  pp.  27-30;  Arethusa  Hall,  op.  cit., 
p.  313. 

44  Journal,  November,  1842,  p.  172. 

*2  Marshall  was  one  of  the  most  gifted  of  the  Washingtonian  orators 
of  the  period.  His  decision  to  sign  the  pledge  in  the  spring  of  1842 
seems  to  have  been  the  occasion  for  the  rejuvenation  of  the  Congres¬ 
sional  Temperance  Society,  which  was  reorganized  with  George  N. 
Briggs  as  president.  P.  T.  D.,  II,  331-332. 

« Speeches  of  Thomas  F.  Marshall  on  Alcohol  and  Intemperance,  p.  4. 


206  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

have  determined  his  personal  opinion,  but  he  expressed  the 
view  of  many  who  had  no  political  future  at  stake.  While 
it  is  impossible  to  discover  what  proportion  of  the  Wash¬ 
ingtonians  agreed  with  him,  there  is  abundant  evidence  that 
the  legal  suasionists,  as  the  supporters  of  restrictive  statutes 
were  called,  received  little  support  from  the  “reformed 
drunkards.” 44  A  writer  in  the  Columbia  Washingtonian 
pointed  out  the  fallacy  of  attempting  to  reconcile  two  such 
antagonistic  principles  as  persuasion  and  coercion.  If  the 
former  had  ever  been  the  proper  method  of  temperance  work, 
and  he  believed  it  had,  it  should  not  be  supplanted  by  the 
latter  at  a  time  when  it  was  proving  highly  successful.40 
Another  correspondent  to  the  same  journal  argued  that  the 
liquor  dealers  were  anxious  for  the  temperance  supporters 
to  commit  the  error  of  legislating  against  the  traffic  in  in¬ 
toxicants. 

The  rum-sellers  [he  wrote]  at  this  moment  are  trembling  at 
the  inroads  made  into  the  ranks  of  their  customers,  and  that 
portion  of  them  who  are  determined  to  hold  out  to  the  last,  are 
already  aware  of  the  certain  destruction  which  awaits  their 
craft.  .  .  .  They  dread  nothing  so  much  as  the  use  of  the 
Washingtonian  weapons  of  light  and  truth,  and  court  nothing  at 
our  hands  so  much  as  a  resort  to  legal  suasion,  relying  on  the 
proneness  of  the  community  to  frown  upon  persecution  and  to 
sympathize  with  its  victims.  Many,  too,  who  now  in  their  hearts 
wish  well  to  the  temperance  cause  would  easily  avail  themselves 
of  the  reason  furnished  by  the  Washingtonians  in  resorting  to 
coercive  means  with  the  rum-seller,  to  halt  in  their  present 
standing,  turn  their  backs  upon  our  cause,  and  content  themselves 

44  The  Augusta  (Ga.)  Washingtonian  for  several  years  argued  for 
moral  suasion,  but  finally  adopted  the  view  of  those  who  believed  that 
the  aid  of  law  should  be  invoked.  Seomp,  op.  cit.,  pp.  400-401.  The 
Columbia  Washingtonian  was  likewise  in  favor  of  legislative  action,  but 
published  much  material  on  the  other  side  of  the  question.  See  issue 
of  Dec.  29,  1842. 

45  Columbia  Washingtonian ,  Feb.  2,  1843. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  207 

with  having  been  almost  persuaded  to  take  upon  them  the  total 
abstinence  vows.  Many,  too,  there  is  reason  to  fear,  who  are 
now  determined  and  able  advocates  of  temperance  would  revolt 
at  the  manifestation  of  a  desire  to  persecute,  and  go  back  and 
walk  no  more  with  us.46 

The  officers  of  the  American  Temperance  Union  had  little 
faith  in  arguments  of  this  character,  but  it  seemed  expedient 
to  them  to  recognize  the  numerical  strength  of  the  moral 
suasionist  faction.  The  columns  of  the  Journal,  therefore, 
were  apportioned  with  even-handed  justice  to  the  controver¬ 
sialists,  who  proceeded  to  confuse  the  issue  with  a  bewilder¬ 
ing  array  of  conflicting  opinions.  In  the  midst  of  the  verbal 
warfare  the  enemies  of  the  liquor  dealers  marshalled  their 
forces,  scarce  knowing  whether  to  regard  the  Washington¬ 
ians  as  friends  or  foes.  Fortunately,  for  their  particular  in¬ 
terest  they  were  not  long  embarrassed  by  this  apparent  op¬ 
position  wuthin  the  temperance  ranks,  for  Washingtonianism 
collapsed  almost  as  suddenly  as  it  had  risen. 

In  the  early  days  of  the  movement  shrewd  observers  had 
pointed  out  tw7o  fundamental  weaknesses  which  might  prove 
its  undoing.  In  the  first  place,  there  was  no  connection  be¬ 
tween  the  various  societies  that  carried  forward  the  work  of 
spreading  Washingtonian  principles.  Each  group  was  al¬ 
lowed  to  follow  its  own  course,  centralized  control  being  con¬ 
sidered  too  great  an  infringement  on  the  rights  of  the  in¬ 
dividual  society.  As  a  result  systematic  organization  was 
impossible ;  uniformity  in  methods  was  never  attained ;  and 
chance  largely  determined  the  formulation  of  principles.  A 
second  weakness  lay  in  the  character  of  the  Washingtonian 
membership.  Many  were  reformed  inebriates  who  had  signed 
the  pledge  during  a  period  of  emotional  exaltation  and  were 
liable  to  suffer  a  corresponding  relapse.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  such  relapses  wTere  not  infrequent  and  tended  to  im¬ 
pair  public  confidence  in  the  movement.  Though  some  were 
40  Ibid.,  Feb.  23,  1843. 


208  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

reclaimed  after  they  had  fallen,  they  were  a  liability  rather 
than  an  asset  to  the  temperance  cause.  Within  ten  years 
after  that  famous  meeting  in  Chase’s  Tavern,  Baltimore, 
Washingtonianism,  as  a  distinct  phase  of  temperance  work, 
had  virtually  disappeared.  That  portion  of  its  membership 
which  remained  faithful  to  the  total  abstinence  pledge  either 
found  a  place  in  the  renewed  activity  of  the  older  societies, 
or  joined  one  of  the  rapidly  growing  fraternal  orders.47 

As  early  as  the  autumn  of  1842,  it  was  apparent  to  sev¬ 
eral  earnest  members  of  the  Washington  Temperance  Society 
in  New  York  City  that  the  new  movement  was  not  properly 
organized  to  retain  the  fruits  of  its  victories.  They  believed 
that  something  would  have  to  be  done  to  prevent  the  reformed 
drunkard  from  violating  his  pledge  and  returning  to  his 
former  habits.  Desertions  were  so  numerous,  it  seemed  to 
them,  that  the  Washingtonian  forces  were  in  imminent  dan¬ 
ger  of  disintegration.  Their  problem,  therefore,  was  to  de¬ 
vise  an  organization  which  would  hold  the  interest  of  its 
members  after  the  first  enthusiasm  had  spent  itself.  The 
first  steps  to  solve  the  problem  were  taken  in  Teetotalers’ 
Hall,  71  Division  street,  on  the  evening  of  September  29, 
1842.  As  announced  on  the  invitation  card,  the  purpose  of 
the  meeting  was  to  organize  a  “beneficial  society  based  on 
total  abstinence,”  to  be  known  as  the  New  York  Division, 
No.  1,  of  the  Sons  of  Temperance.  Such  a  plan  met  with 
the  approval  of  the  sixteen  Washingtonians  who  attended  the 
initial  meeting,  and  a  committee  was  appointed  to  draw  up  a 
constitution.48 

47  P.  T.  D.,  II,  Eighth  Report,  p.  17;  Jewett,  op.  cit.,  pp.  29-30; 
Clark,  op.  cit.,  pp.  53-54;  Scomp,  op.  cit.,  386-387;  W.  M.  Thayer, 
Charles  Jewett,  Life  and  Recollections,  pp.  165-166;  Temperance  in 
the  City  of  New  York  (1844). 

Journal  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Division  of  the  Sons 
of  Temperance  of  New  York  (1845),  pp.  47,  vii-xlvii.  The  leading 
spirits  in  the  formation  of  the  Order  were  Daniel  H.  Sands,  John  W. 
Oliver  and  Isaac  J.  Oliver. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  209 

Having  worked  for  several  months  to  perfect  various  de¬ 
tails  of  the  proposed  Order,  the  charter  members  of  New 
York  Division  were  ready  in  January,  1843,  to  announce  the 
result  of  their  deliberations.  In  a  circular  “to  the  friends 
of  temperance  in  the  United  States”  they  stated  that  the 
Sons  of  Temperance  had  three  distinct  objects  in  view :  “To 
shield  us  from  the  evils  of  intemperance;  afford  mutual  as¬ 
sistance  in  case  of  sickness ;  and  elevate  our  characters  as 
men.”  The  first  object  was  to  be  effected  through  the  in¬ 
strumentality  of  the  pledge  which  read:  “No  brother  shall 
make,  buy,  sell,  or  use  as  a  beverage,  any  spirituous  or  malt 
liquors,  wine  or  cider.”  The  protective  feature  was  to  be 
taken  care  of  through  the  payment  of  a  nominal  initiation 
fee  and  weekly  dues.  Permanent  organizations  of  the  Or¬ 
der  consisted  of  three  classes,  namely,  subordinate  divisions, 
grand  divisions,  and  a  national  division.  The  subordinate 
division  was  the  local  lodge  Avhich  selected  its  membership  by 
the  usual  process  from  men  over  eighteen  years  of  age,  who 
had  signed  the  total  abstinence  pledge.  The  grand  division 
consisted  of  all  past  and  acting  Worthy  Patriarchs  of  local 
lodges  within  a  state,  while  the  national  division  was  com¬ 
posed  of  the  past  and  acting  Grand  Worthy  Patriarchs  of 
the  state  divisions.  Thus,  control  in  the  Order  was  vested  in 
a  hierarchy  which  was  presided  over  by  the  officers  of  the 
national  division.40 

The  highly  centralized  form  of  organization  enabled  of¬ 
ficers  to  supervise  carefully  the  conduct  of  the  members. 
Furthermore,  the  fraternal  bond  encouraged  the  brethren 
to  guard  each  other  against  violations  of  the  pledge.  Every 
member  was  urged  to  report  any  infractions  of  the  rules 
that  came  to  his  notice,  in  order  that  the  division  might 
take  proper  action.  From  the  number  of  suspensions  and 
expulsions  recorded  in  the  journals  of  the  several  grand 

Ibid.,  xxxiii-xxxv. 


210  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

divisions  it  is  evident  that  a  strict  discipline  was  main¬ 
tained  within  the  Order.50 

Neither  centralized  control  nor  excellent  discipline,  how¬ 
ever,  could  secure  uniformity  of  opinion.  The  Sons  seem 
to  have  been  as  hopelessly  divided  over  the  advisability  of 
legislating  against  the  liquor  traffic  as  were  the  temperance 
folk  outside  their  ranks.  The  editor  of  the  Organ ,  official 
journal  for  the  fraternity  in  New  York,  was  openly  favour¬ 
able  to  the  cause  of  the  legal  suasionists,  devoting  a  portion 
of  nearly  every  issue  to  a  discussion  of  the  question.51  But 
his  view  was  not  acceptable  everywhere  in  the  Order.  In 
1847,  for  instance,  a  subordinate  division  in  Philadelphia 
appealed  to  the  quarterly  session  of  the  Pennsylvania 
Grand  Division,  charging  that  certain  members  were  trying 
to  commit  the  fraternity  to  the  support  of  legislative  re¬ 
strictions  on  the  liquor  traffic.  After  an  extensive  investi¬ 
gation  a  special  committee  reported  that  the  charges  were 
well  founded  and  recommended  that  the  members  be  censured 
for  their  interference  in  a  matter  of  general  policy.  The 
Grand  Division  at  its  regular  meeting  in  1848  heal’d  the  com¬ 
mittee’s  l'eport  and  ordered  it  laid  on  the  table,  evidently 
unwilling  to  risk  a  record  vote  on  the  question.52 

Differences  of  opinion  did  not  seriously  affect  the  harmoni¬ 
ous  relation  between  divisions,  nor  interfere  with  the  rapid 
growth  of  the  Order.  In  1844  grand  divisions  were  es¬ 
tablished  in  New  Jersey,  Maryland,  Pennsylvania,  Con¬ 
necticut  and  the  District  of  Columbia.  The  following  year 
there  wei’e  enough  suboi-dinate  divisions  in  Maine,  Delaware, 

so  Journal  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Division  of  Pennsylvania. 
(1848),  pp.  136-149;  Journal  ...  of  ..  .  New  York  (1846),  pp.  143- 
145.  In  Pennsylvania,  for  example,  during  1848  approximately  1500 
were  suspended  and  3200  expelled  for  violating  the  pledge. 

51  Organ,  Oct.  26,  Nov.  23,  30,  Dec.  14,  28,  1844,  Jan.  4,  11,  1845. 

62  Minutes  of  the  Quarterly  Session  of  the  Grand  Division  of 
Pennsylvania,  Jan.  26,  1848,  pp.  100-119.  See  also  B.  A.  Clark, 
Oration  Delivered  before  Niagara  Division,  No.  109,  of  the  Sons  of 
Temperance  (1846). 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  211 

Virginia,  North  Carolina,  Missouri,  and  Ohio  to  justify  the 
creation  of  state  jurisdictions.  The  180  lodges  then  in  ex¬ 
istence  enrolled  nearly  10,000  members.  Within  the  next 
five  years  the  growth  of  the  fraternity  was  so  rapid  that 
in  1850  the  National  Division  reported  36  grand  divisions, 
5894  subordinate  divisions  and  245,233  paying  members.53 

These  years  of  expansion  were  also  years  of  conflict.  Al¬ 
though  the  hostility  to  secret  societies  and  fraternal  or¬ 
ders,  which  was  manifested  in  the  anti-Masonic  agitation 
of  the  twenties  and  thirties,  had  gradually  subsided,  there 
were  many  who  remembered  the  prejudices  of  former  days. 
Their  presence  in  the  temperance  movement  furnished  a  spir¬ 
ited  opposition  to  the  Sons  of  Temperance.  They  regarded 
the  Order  as  a  secret  society,  organized  to  perpetuate  prin¬ 
ciples  similar  to  those  of  the  Masonic  fraternity  or  the  In¬ 
dependent  Order  of  Odd  Fellows.  Therefore,  the  organiza¬ 
tion  was  objectionable  as  an  agency  in  the  work  of  moral  re¬ 
form.  The  attack  on  it  was  led  by  John  Marsh  for  the 
American  Temperance  Union.  In  the  columns  of  the  Jour¬ 
nal  he  rebuked  the  temperance  papers  which  had  hailed  the 
secret  fraternities  as  the  summum  bonum  of  the  temperance 
reform.  His  objections  to  the  Sons  of  Temperance  and 
similar  orders  were  based,  he  said,  not  upon  prejudice  but 
upon  knowledge.54  None  of  the  organizations  wTere  “bene¬ 
ficial  societies”  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word.  They  gave 
no  aid  to  the  poor,  miserable  inebriate,  unless  he  was  able  to 
pay  an  initiation  fee  and  monthly  dues.  The  Independent 
Order  of  Rechabites  refused  to  elect  anyone  to  membership 
Journal  ...  of  ..  .  New  York  (1845),  pp.  viii-ix;  P.  S.  White 
and  E.  S.  Ely,  Vindication  of  the  Order  of  the  Sons  of  Temperance, 
pp.  26—30;  Dorchester,  op.  cit.,  p.  278. 

5*  The  Independent  Order  of  Rechabites,  taking  its  name  from  that 
religious  order  among  the  Israelites  which  abstained  from  wine  and 
dwelt  in  tents,  was  securing  a  following  in  the  United  States  at  the 
time  the  Sons  of  Temperance  was  organized.  It  was  of  English  origin, 
the  first  “tent”  having  been  formed  in  1835.  In  1848  there  were  253 
primary  tents  with  14,253  members  in  the  United  States  and  Canada. 


212  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

who  was  not  free  from  “all  bodily  disease  or  infirmity  that 
would  render  him  burdensome  to  the  tent,”  while  the  Sons 
of  Temperance  rejected  anyone  who  was  incapacitated  from 
earning  a  livelihood,  or  had  no  visible  means  of  support. 
These  regulations  prevented  both  Orders  from  serving  the 
men  most  in  need  of  their  benevolence. 

Furthermore,  any  attempt  to  carry  on  temperance  work 
behind  the  veil  of  secrecy,  Marsh  insisted,  wrnuld  inevitably 
arouse  distrust  and  fear  in  the  minds  of  many  friends  of 
reform.  It  mattered  not  that  the  Order  of  the  Sons  of 
Temperance  had  announced  to  the  public  its  object,  its 
laws,  its  numbers  and  its  officers.  It  remained  a  secret  soci¬ 
ety  because  its  meetings  wTere  closed  to  all  except  the  few  who 
had  been  carefully  selected  for  membership.  The  absence 
of  elaborate  regalia  and  extensive  ritual  did  not  free  it  from 
the  taint  of  aristocratic  intrigue.  Finally,  the  organiza¬ 
tion  of  the  fraternity  was  such  as  to  constitute  a  menace 
to  all  who  took  its  obligation.  Control  was  so  centralized 
in  a  small  hierarchy  that  the  principle  of  democracy  was  re¬ 
placed  by  that  of  oligarchy ;  and  it  would  not  be  difficult  for 
the  oligarchy  to  become  despotic.55 

The  editor  of  the  Organ,  answering  this  attack,  laughed  at 
Marsh’s  lack  of  humour  in  applying  the  same  standards  to 
the  Sons  of  Temperance  as  he  would  apply  to  a  Bible  soci¬ 
ety,  a  tract  society  or  a  missionary  auxiliary.  As  for  the 
charge  of  secrecy,  he  considered  it  ridiculous  that  a  few 
pass-words,  which  were  the  only  secrets  that  members  of  the 
Order  enjoyed,  should  be  made  into  a  bogey  to  frighten  peo¬ 
ple.  He  reminded  the  Journal  that  his  fraternity  was  not 
designed  to  do  the  work  of  ordinary  temperance  societies. 
Its  function  was  to  take  care  of  “follow  up”  work  after 
the  propaganda  of  the  regular  organizations  had  been  suc¬ 
cessful.58 

55  Journal,  May,  1844,  pp.  65-66,  September,  pp.  137-138,  October, 
pp.  145—146. 

so  Organ,  Oct.  26,  1844. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  213 

So  numerous  became  the  attacks  on  the  Order  from  Chris¬ 
tian  congregations,  ministerial  associations  and  ecclesiastical 
assemblies  that  it  seemed  necessary  to  publish  an  elaborate 
defence.  Philip  S.  White,  Most  Worthy  Patriarch  of  the 
National  Division,  and  Dr.  Ezra  S.  Ely,  Chaplain  of  the 
Grand  Division  of  Pennsylvania,  wrote  an  able  “Vindica¬ 
tion,”  which  was  circulated  in  1848.  Their  chief  concern 
was  to  quiet  the  insistent  charge  that  membership  in  the 
Sons  of  Temperance  was  regarded  by  the  Order  as  a  sub¬ 
stitute  for  membership  in  a  Christian  church.  The  “Vin¬ 
dication”  categorically  denied  that  any  of  the  divisions  was 
attempting  to  control  the  religious  beliefs  of  its  members 
and  cited  as  proof  the  large  number  of  Protestant  ministers 
of  different  denominations,  who  occupied  official  positions  in 
the  grand  divisions  of  their  respective  states.57  The  most 
significant  statement,  however,  defined  the  relation  of  the 
Order  to  the  wider  scope  of  the  temperance  movement : 

We  seek  to  reclaim  inebriates;  to  confirm  men  in  total  absti¬ 
nence  from  all  that  can  intoxicate  them;  to  encourage  and  animate 
in  every  good  work  all  reclaimed  drunkards;  to  retain  none  any 
longer  than  they  continue  faithful  to  their  solemn  promise;  and 
to  afford  assistance,  in  case  of  sickness  or  death  of  a  brother,  or 
the  decease  of  his  wife,  to  such  persons  as  are  by  our  constitution 
entitled  to  the  same.  Our  halls  are  also  intended  to  be  pleasant 
places  of  resort  and  social  intercourse,  in  which  young  men 
especially  may  acquire  habits  of  public  speaking,  and  of  transact¬ 
ing  the  business  of  a  popular  assembly ;  and  by  which  many  who 
have  leisure,  may  be  lured  from  the  bar-room  and  other  scenes 
of  dissipation.58 

Here,  at  last,  was  a  group  which  offered  a  substitute  for 
tbe  social  attractions  of  the  grog-shop  and  tippling-house. 
Dr.  Rush  had  recognized  the  value  of  the  compensating  sub¬ 
stitute  in  his  recommendation  that  drinkers  of  ardent  spirits 

57  P.  S.  White  and  E.  S.  Ely,  of.  cit.,  p.  39. 

58  Ibid.,  p.  33. 


214  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

try  the  milder  stimulation  of  wine  and  malt  liquors.  The 
advocates  of  total  abstinence,  however,  did  not  include  in 
their  scheme  of  things  any  provision  for  softening  the 
hardships  of  self-denial.  In  their  plan  virtue  was  its  own 
reward.  The  problem  of  the  abstainer’s  leisure  time  received 
scant  attention,  though  occasionally  the  suggestion  was  made 
that  hours  formerly  spent  in  convivial  tippling  or  drunken 
carousal  might  well  be  devoted  to  furthering  the  work  of 
some  moral  or  religious  society.  It  remained  for  the  Sons 
of  Temperance  to  make  the  first  feeble  gesture  toward  an 
idea  which  later  became  tremendously  important  in  meeting 
the  challenge  of  the  saloon. 

The  period  of  the  Washingtonian  revival  was  marked  by 
the  increased  interest  and  more  active  participation  of 
women  in  the  reform.  As  the  drunkard’s  reformation  di¬ 
rected  attention  to  social  and  economic  conditions  in  his 
family,  it  became  apparent  that  some  form  of  organized 
charity  was  needed  to  assist  in  the  establishment  of  a  proper 
home  life.  In  this  work  the  women  of  the  country  quickly 
took  the  lead.  Under  the  name  of  Martha  Washington 
societies  and  Ladies’  Benevolent  societies  they  not  only  cared 
for  the  poor  and  unfortunate  victims  of  intemperance  by 
providing  food  and  clothing,  but  they  also  attacked  the 
vice  of  drunkenness  among  their  own  sex  and  secured  signa¬ 
tures  to  the  total  abstinence  pledge.59  But  their  task  was 
chiefly  a  work  of  charity,  for  American  women  had  earned  a 
reputation  for  abstemiousness  long  before  the  temperance 
reform  enlisted  their  aid.  Wherever  the  Washingtonian 
movement  spread,  then,  it  was  apt  to  be  supplemented  by 
auxiliary  organizations  of  women  whose  benevolent  efforts 
were  often  the  means  of  holding  ground  that  had  been  won. 
Not  only  were  their  services  invaluable,  but  their  financial 

59  Journal,  November,  1841,  p.  171,  January,  1842,  p.  7,  July  1,  1843, 
pp.  99-100;  iV.  Y.  Tribune,  Jan.  13,  1842;  J.  G.  Woolley  and  W.  E. 
Johnson,  Temperance  Progress  in  the  Century,  p.  90. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  215 

contributions  to  the  reform  were  far  from  negligible,  for 
they  swelled  the  treasury  of  many  a  society  by  the  proceeds 
from  temperance  fairs  and  bazaars. 

The  activity  of  women  in  temperance  work  seems  to  have 
called  forth  less  opposition  than  it  did  in  the  case  of  the 
anti-slavery  movement.  After  1840  many  temperance  pub¬ 
lications  urged  women  not  to  confine  their  influence  to  the 
home,  but  to  affiliate  with  some  active  society.  In  October, 
1843,  two  of  the  charter  members  of  the  Sons  of  Temperance, 
Daniel  Sands  and  John  W.  Oliver,  assisted  in  the  formation 
of  a  similar  organization  among  the  members  of  the  Martha 
Washington  societies  in  New  York  City.  The  new  Order, 
known  as  the  Daughters  of  Temperance,  was  a  mutual 
benefit  association  which  elected  to  membership  women  above 
the  age  of  fifteen  who  had  signed  the  total  abstinence  pledge. 
Weekly  benefits  were  paid  during  the  illness  of  a  member, 
and  in  the  event  of  death  a  definite  sum  was1  applied  to  the 
payment  of  funeral  expenses.  This  protective  feature  was 
stressed  in  an  energetic  campaign  to  increase  the  strength  of 
the  Order,  but  the  popular  response  was  discouraging.  Few 
locals  were  established  outside  of  New  York,  Pennsylvania 
and  the  New  England  states.  The  influence  of  the  existing 
local  unions  was  weakened  by  dissension  within  the  Order 
which  finally  resulted  in  the  formation  of  a  rival  sorority.60 

It  was  in  a  local  union  of  the  Daughters  of  Temperance  at 
Canajoharie,  New  York,  in  1849  that  Susan  B.  Anthony 
made  her  first  speech  in  favour  of  temperance,  an  opportun¬ 
ity  which  she  used  to  secure  a  hearing  for  the  cause  of 

bo  Organ,  June  21,  1845,  November  9,  1844;  Clark,  op.  cit.,  67-72. 
In  1846  certain  members  of  the  Sons  of  Temperance  were  responsible 
for  the  formation  of  the  Cadets  of  Temperance,  which  enrolled  boys 
between  the  ages  of  twelve  and  eighteen.  Each  section  of  the  Cadets 
was  under  the  guardianship  of  three  responsible  Sons  of  Temperance, 
In  1849  the  Cadets  claimed  between  eight  and  nine  thousand  members, 
a  majority  of  them  in  Pennsylvania.  Marcus  E.  Cross,  The  Mirror  of 
Intemperance,  pp.  157-159. 


216  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

women’s  rights.  Frequently  in  her  subsequent  career  she 
presented  the  two  reforms  as  complementary  to  each  other.61 
Miss  Anthony,  however,  was  not  the  first  woman  to  attack 
the  vice  of  intemperance  from  a  public  platform.  In  1840 
Lucretia  Mott,  one  of  the  American  women  denied  admission 
to  the  World’s  Anti-slavery  Convention  in  London,  had  lec¬ 
tured  several  times  in  England  and  Ireland  on  the  anti¬ 
slavery  movement,  the  social  condition  of  women  and  the  tem¬ 
perance  reform.  Elizabeth  Cady  Stanton,  who  heard  her  in 
London,  was  so  impressed  that  she  decided  to  seek  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  present  her  views  in  public.  Two  years  later,  while 
living  in  Johnstown,  New  York,  she  made  her  debut  in  a  tem¬ 
perance  plea  before  an  audience  that  contained  more  than  a 
hundred  men.  During  these  years  Abby  Kelly,  who  was  win¬ 
ning  fame  and  not  a  little  notoriety  as  an  unusually  vigorous 
opponent  of  slavery,  began  to  champion  total  abstinence  with 
considerable  success.  After  1847  her  achievements  wrere  ri¬ 
valled  by  those  of  Lucy  Stone,  who  found  that  audiences  in¬ 
terested  in  temperance  were  sometimes  willing  to  listen  to  ar¬ 
guments  in  favour  of  women’s  rights.62 

The  efforts  of  these  pioneer  women  were  not  heralded  in 
the  columns  of  the  Journal  of  the  American  Temperance 
Union,  possibly  because  no  information  reached  the  editor. 
It  is  more  probable,  however,  that  the  Journal’s  silence  was 
dictated  by  a  desire  to  avoid  embarrassment.  Any  mention 
of  the  service  rendered  to  temperance  by  these  women  en¬ 
thusiasts  would  be  apt  to  precipitate  a  controversy  over  the 
propriety  of  their  conduct  and  the  safeness  of  their  anti¬ 
slavery  views.  Either  question,  revealing  important  differ¬ 
ences  of  opinion  among  the  reformers,  would  tend  to  destroy 
harmony,  a  situation  which  the  officers  of  the  Union  greatly 
desired  to  avoid. 

Ida  H.  Harper,  The  Life  and  Work  of  Susan  B.  Anthony,  I,  53—55. 

62  Ibid.,  I,  62-63,  67-68;  James  and  Lucretia  Mott,  Anna  D.  Hallowell, 
editor,  pp.  187,  191,  228;  Reminiscences  of  Elizabeth  Cady  Stanton, 
p.  Ill;  Erasmus  Wilson,  op.  cit.,  p.  906. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  217 
Indeed,  at  this  time  the  temperance  leaders  were  learning 
that  any  reform  is  apt  to  attract  the  support  of  advocates 
who  hinder  rather  than  help  the  cause.  The  zeal  of  the  anti¬ 
slavery  element  threatened  to  cause  serious  trouble,  as 
several  incidents  between  1816  and  1850  gave  evidence  of 
hidden  feeling  over  the  question.  At  the  first  session  of  the 
World’s  Temperance  Convention,  which  met  on  August  4, 
1846,  in  the  hall  of  the  London  Literary  Institution,  a 
remark  by  Rev.  E.  N.  Kirk  of  Albany  to  the  effect  that 
many  slave-holders  were  good  men  aroused  the  anger  of 
those  who  held  abolitionist  views.  William  Lloyd  Garrison, 
although  not  a  regularly  elected  delegate,  secured  the  floor 
for  the  purpose  of  denouncing  Kirk’s  statement.  Much  to 
his  disgust,  however,  he  was  not  permitted  to  finish,  for  a 
majority  of  the  Convention  desired  to  prevent  an  acrimonious 
debate  on  the  subject.  But  it  was  some  time  before  the 
meeting  was  quieted  sufficiently  for  the  transaction  of  busi¬ 
ness.63  The  alacrity  and  unanimity  with  which  the  Ameri¬ 
can  delegation  silenced  Garrison  did  not  reveal  personal  hos¬ 
tility  so  much  as  a  desire  to  refrain  from  giving  offence  to  the 
friends  of  the  institution  of  slavery.  At  the  closing  session 
of  the  conference  in  Covent  Garden  bitter  feeling  was  again 
aroused,  this  time  by  the  Negro  orator,  Frederick  Douglass. 
He  attacked  the  temperance  movement  in  the  United  States 
for  its  failure  both  to  make  provision  for  the  Negro  in  its 
ranks  and  to  concern  itself  with  his  bondage.  The  speech 
was  apparently  cut  short  by  the  presiding  officer,  whereupon 
Rev.  E.  N.  Kirk  arose  and  answered  it  to  the  extent  of  deny¬ 
ing  that  American  temperance  reformers  were  supporters  of 
slavery.  As  a  result  of  this  episode  Rev.  Samuel  H.  Cox  of 
Brooklyn  wrote  a  vigorous  letter  to  the  editor  of  the  New 
York  Evangelist,  charging  Douglass  with  being  in  the  pay  of 
interested  parties  and  accusing  the  abolitionists  of  a  plot 

63  Journal,  October,  1846,  p.  145;  William  Lloyd  Garrison,  The  Story 
of  his  Life,  III,  157. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


218 

to  injure  the  temperance  movement,  since  they  could  not 
control  it.64 

Although  the  accusations  against  Douglass  were  not  based 
on  any  evidence,  subsequent  events  made  some  temperance 
advocates  believe  that  the  Garrisonian  abolitionists  were 
determined  to  make  trouble  for  them.  On  July  2,  1849, 
Father  Mathew  arrived  in  New  York  City  for  an  extensive 
tour  of  the  country,  which  had  been  long  awaited  by  those 
who  had  followed  his  work  in  Ireland.  A  formal  welcome 
by  Mayor  Woodhull  expressed  the  hope  that  the  “apostle  of 
temperance”  might  be  as  successful  in  the  United  States  as 
he  had  been  in  his  native  land.  After  spending  three  weeks  in 
the  vicinity  of  New  York,  during  which  time  he  administered 
his  pledge  to  thousands  of  Catholics,  he  departed  for  Boston 
where  he  experienced  an  embarrassing  encounter  with  the 
abolitionists.  The  Board  of  Managers  of  the  Massachusetts 
Anti-slavery  Society  extended  its  welcome  to  him  in  the  form 
of  an  invitation  to  speak  at  a  mass-meeting  in  Worcester, 
arranged  to  celebrate  the  anniversary  of  the  abolition  of 
slavery  in  the  British  West  Indies.  In  its  communication 
the  committee  reminded  Father  Mathew  that  he  had  signed 
an  “Address,”  drawn  up  by  Daniel  O’Connell  in  1841,  urg¬ 
ing  the  Irish  in  America  to  support  the  cause  of  abolition. 
When  the  communication  was  presented,  Father  Mathew 
informed  William  Lloyd  Garrison  that  his  position  as  a 
Catholic  priest  and  as  an  advocate  of  temperance,  who  in¬ 
tended  to  visit  the  slave-holding  states,  made  it  necessary 
for  him  to  decline  to  attend  the  Worcester  meeting.  So 
irritated  was  Garrison  by  the  incident  that  he  spread  several 
accounts  of  it  in  the  columns  of  the  Liberator,  portraying 
Father  Mathew  as  a  man  without  honour  who  sacrificed  his 
principles  for  the  sake  of  expediency.65  The  newspapers 

64  Journal,  October,  1846,  p.  159;  Life  and  Times  of  Frederick 
Douglass,  Written  by  Himself,  pp.  305-309;  N.  Y.  Evangelist,  Sept.  5, 
1846. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL  219 

immediately  took  up  the  story,  commenting  on  its  various 
aspects.  Generally  sentiment  was  favourable  to  the  priest, 
editorials  either  praised  his  conduct,  or  defended  his  course 
as  the  best  way  out  of  a  trying  situation.  The  South 
Carolina  Temperance  Advocate  was  convinced  that  the  Irish 
leader  was  not  a  fanatic  on  the  slavery  question,  and  Judge 
John  B.  O’Neall,  president  of  the  state  society,  invited  him 
to  visit  the  home  of  Calhoun. 

Not  all  Southerners,  however,  viewed  Father  Mathew’s 
attitude  in  the  same  light.  Reports  of  the  Boston  interview 
published  in  Georgia  emphasized  the  importance  of  the  Irish 
“Address”  which  had  been  read  at  the  great  anti-slavery 
meeting  in  Faneuil  Hall  on  January  28,  1812.  Since  Father 
Mathew  had  signed  this  abolition  document,  it  was  evident 
that  he  was  an  enemy  of  slavery.  Accordingly,  the  presi¬ 
dent  of  the  Georgia  State  Temperance  Society,  Judge  Joseph 
H.  Lumpkin,  wrote  to  the  distinguished  reformer  expi’essing 
regret  that  the  Society  was  forced  to  withdraw  its  previous 
invitation  to  visit  the  state.  In  subsequent  correspondence, 
however,  Father  Mathew  assured  Judge  Lumpkin  of  his 
“single-mindedness  in  the  advocacy  of  the  all-absorbing 
cause  of  temperance”  and  his  resolution  “not  to  interfere 
in  the  slightest  degree  with  the  institutions  of  this  mighty 
Republic.”  These  assurances  placated  the  Georgians  and 
they  welcomed  the  “apostle  of  temperance”  to  Augusta  in 
January,  1850,  with  a  torchlight  procession.66 

While  the  difficulties  arising  out  of  the  interview  with 
Garrison  were  still  unsettled,  Father  Mathew  reached  Wash¬ 
ington  on  his  trip  southward.  He  was  enthusiastically 
received  by  the  Catholics  of  the  city,  many  of  whom  accepted 

es  Garrison  attributed  Father  Mathew’s  attitude  to  the  admonition 
of  the  “slaveite,”  Bishop  Hughes  of  the  New  York  diocese.  William 
Lloyd  Garrison,  III,  248;  Liberator,  XVIII,  126. 

66  For  Father  Mathew’s  letter  to  Judge  Lumpkin  see  Scomp,  op.  cit., 
pp.  447-450, 


220  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

the  total  abstinence  pledge.  He  was  entertained  by  Presi¬ 
dent  Taylor  at  the  White  House,  and  was  honoured  by  an 
invitation  to  occupy  a  seat  in  the  House  of  Representatives. 
A  resolution,  presented  by  Senator  Walker  of  Wisconsin, 
that  he  be  requested  to  pay  a  visit  to  the  Senate  met  with 
unexpected  opposition.  Senator  Clemens  of  Alabama  de¬ 
clared  that  he  was  willing  to  honour  a  famous  champion  of 
temperance,  but  he  objected  to  Father  Mathew  because  he 
was  an  abolitionist.  In  the  debate  that  followed  a  score  of 
Senators  attacked  and  defended  the  resolution,  their  com¬ 
ments  dealing  chiefly  with  the  attitude  of  the  Irish  priest  to¬ 
ward  slavery.  Clay,  Cass  and  Seward,  not  often  united  in 
support  of  any  measure,  agreed  that  the  whole  discussion 
was  much  ado  about  nothing,  since  Father  Mathew  had  given 
adequate  assurance  that  he  was  interested  only  in  carrying 
forward  the  fight  against  intemperance.  Jefferson  Davis, 
however,  was  not  convinced.  He  demanded  that  all  aboli¬ 
tionists,  whatever  their  mission,  be  excluded  from  the  Senate 
Chamber.  John  P.  Hale  of  New  Hampshire  stated  his  in¬ 
tention  of  voting  for  the  resolution,  but  he  did  not  want  his 
vote  to  be  interpreted  as  a  sanction  of  the  artful  manner  in 
which  Father  Mathew  had  dodged  the  slavery  issue.  When 
the  vote  was  finally  taken,  the  resolution  passed  in  spite  of 
the  opposition  of  eighteen  Senators  from  slave-holding  states. 
The  result  was  in  the  nature  of  a  calamity,  however,  for  the 
temperance  champion  must  now  carry  his  cause  among 
people  whose  representatives  in  Congress  had  publicly  con¬ 
demned  his  slavery  views.67 

Father  Mathesv’s  tour  of  the  South,  though  in  no  sense 
a  failure,  was  disappointing  to  his  intimate  friends.  They 
attributed  his  moderate  success  to  the  unfavourable  reports 

67  Congressional  Globe,  31st  Cong.,  first  session,  pp.  51-59;  Annual 
Report  of  the  Massachusetts  Anti-slavery  Society  (1850);  Journal, 
February,  1850,  p.  21;  Liberator,  XIX,  190,  194,  XX,  15,  24;  William 
Lloyd  Garrison,  III,  pp.  247-261;  Maguire,  op.  cit.,  479--486. 


THE  WASHINGTONIAN  REVIVAL 


221 

which  had  preceded  his  visit,  but  there  were  other  factors 
which  were  at  least  equally  responsible.  Many  Catholics 
were  displeased  because  he  appeared  in  public  too  frequently 
at  meetings  which  were  manifestly  under  Protestant  auspices. 
The  Protestants,  on  the  other  hand,  accepted  his  ministra¬ 
tions  with  little  enthusiasm.  As  might  be  expected,  in  view 
of  the  increasing  nativist  sentiment  in  the  country,  the  charge 
of  “Romanism”  was  often  used  against  him.  Some  there 
were  who  criticized  his  custom  of  requesting  persons  to  kneel 
and  receive  the  sign  of  the  cross  as  they  took  the  pledge. 
Despite  religious  prejudice,  however,  Father  Mathew’s  work 
was  not  limited  to  persons  of  his  own  faith.  Although  his 
first  concern  was  to  encourage  the  existing  Catholic  Total 
Abstinence  societies  and  to  organize  others,  he  administered 
the  pledge  to  all  who  presented  themselves.  His  journal 
refers  constantly  to  the  number  of  “dissenters”  who  attended 
services  at  the  churches  where  he  celebrated  mass.  Many 
of  them,  he  thought,  came  out  of  curiosity,  but  some  remained 
to  hear  his  temperance  plea  at  the  close  of  the  service.68 

In  comparison  with  the  emotional  response  which  he  had 
aroused  in  Ireland,  Father  Mathew  made  little  impression 
on  American  Catholics.  But  it  is  manifestly  unfair  to  judge 
his  work  in  the  United  States  on  the  basis  of  his  extraor¬ 
dinary  success  in  his  native  land.  In  Ireland,  he  had  virgin 
soil ;  in  America  he  gleaned  after  many  who  had  reaped 
harvests.  Still,  in  New  York,  Boston,  Philadelphia  and 
Baltimore  thousands  were  induced  to  adopt  the  principle  of 
total  abstinence  and  temperance  sentiment  among  the  Catho¬ 
lics  was  signally  strengthened.  Reasonably  successful  meet¬ 
ings  in  Richmond,  Charleston,  Augusta  and  Mobile  reached 
their  climax  in  New  Orleans,  where  more  than  12,000  were 

os  Journal,  August,  1849,  p.  123,  April,  1850,  p.  61;  Maguire,  op.  cit., 
pp.  488-500;  J.  G.  Shea,  A  History  of  the  Catholic  Church  within  the 
limits  of  the  United  States,  pp.  186-187 ;  Woolley  and  Johnson,  op.  cit., 
95-97. 


222  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

reported  to  have  signed  the  pledge  during  the  days  that 
Father  Mathew  preached  at  the  old  St.  Louis’  Cathedral. 
As  he  journeyed  northward  along  the  Mississippi,  he  was 
handicapped  by  ill  health,  but  by  the  time  he  reached  St. 
Louis  his  strength  had  returned.  At  the  urgent  request  of 
Bishop  Rapp  of  the  Cleveland  diocese  he  visited  northern 
Ohio  and  western  Pennsylvania  in  the  autumn  of  1850.  Re¬ 
turning  South  for  the  winter  he  was  pleased  to  find  “Father 
Mathew”  societies  flourishing  in  the  states  which  he  had  pre¬ 
viously  visited.  When  the  time  came  for  his  return  to  Ireland 
in  November,  1851,  the  New  York  Herald  estimated  that  he 
had  travelled  37,000  miles  through  twenty-five  states  and  had 
administered  the  pledge  to  almost  half  a  million.69  If  this 
be  correct,  the  Irish  priest  had  reached  almost  one-third  of 
the  Catholics  in  the  United  States.70 

In  the  opinion  of  many  temperance  workers  there  was 
one  important  defect  in  Father  Mathew’s  theory  and  prac¬ 
tice.  Failing  to  stress  sufficiently  the  moral  culpability  of 
the  liquor  dealer,  he  did  not  reach  the  conclusion  that  legal 
restriction  was  necessary  to  combat  the  evil  of  intemperance. 
Like  so  many  reformers  before  him,  he  relied  upon  the  power 
of  a  symbol  to  keep  men  sober.  He  voiced  no  plea  for 
legislation  to  prevent  the  rum-seller  from  undoing  the  work 
of  reform.  It  was  true  that  he  condemned  the  distiller  and 
retailer,  but  he  did  not  urge  his  hearers  to  use  their  political 
power  to  break  up  the  trade  in  intoxicants.  This  significant 
omission,  many  reformers  believed,  made  it  necessary  to  dis¬ 
count  greatly  his  value  to  the  cause.  The  accessions  to  the 
ranks  of  total  abstainers  were  important.  But  how 
much  more  important,  if  they  had  been  taught  to  work  and 
vote  for  the  legal  destruction  of  the  liquor  traffic. 

«» N.  Y.  Tribune,  July  4,  6,  20,  27,  31,  1849;  N.  Y.  Herald,  Nov.  8, 
1851;  Journal,  May,  1850,  p.  74,  July,  p.  103,  November,  p.  161; 
Maguire,  op.  cit.,  pp.  500-551;  G.  F.  Houck,  The  Church  in  Northern 
Ohio  and  in  the  Diocese  of  Cleveland,  pp.  23,  26. 

to  The  Roman  Catholics  in  the  United  States  in  1850  were  enumerated 
ns  1,500,000,  Channing,  History  of  the  United  Stales,  V,  220, 


CHAPTER  X 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST 

Few  special  interest  groups  in  the  history  of  the  American 
people  have  surpassed  the  temperance  reformers  in  the  dis¬ 
tribution  of  literary  propaganda.  Periodicals,  pamphlets 
and  broadsides  fell  from  the  press  with  a  rapidity  that  belied 
the  slender  resources  of  the  organizations  financing  their 
publication.  It  seemed  to  be  the  aim  of  the  societies  to 
present  to  the  reading  public  every  conceivable  appeal  and 
argument  that  could  be  made  through  the  medium  of  the 
printed  page.  Factional  quarrels  and  doctrinal  disputes, 
which  threatened  to  disrupt  the  unity  of  the  movement, 
tended  to  increase  the  normal  output  of  literature  because 
of  the  unusual  interest  aroused  by  the  controversies.  Hun¬ 
dreds  of  thousands  of  pages  were  annually  reported  by  print¬ 
ing  committees  of  the  state  societies,  until  the  very  bulk  of 
the  publications  seemed  to  augur  success  for  the  cause. 

Despite  this  activity,  the  financial  resources  of  the  re¬ 
formers  were  not  only  slight,  but  also  uncertain.  The 
problem  of  securing  funds  was  always  with  them.  Prior  to 
1840  no  state  society  had  incorporated  in  its  constitution  a 
provision  for  the  permanent  supply  of  its  treasury.  All 
relied  upon  donations,  special  collections  and  receipts  from 
publications  to  provide  revenue  sufficient  for  their  needs. 
The  American  Temperance  Society  encouraged  contributions 
by  offering  honorary  memberships  for  thirty  dollars  and  by 
conferring  on  every  donor  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  dollars 

the  title  of  honorary  vice-president.  The  executive  com- 

223 


224  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

mittee  of  the  American  Temperance  Union  did  not  apportion 
its  expenses  among  the  various  auxiliaries,  but  depended 
upon  the  gifts  of  generous  friends  and  the  proceeds  from  the 
sale  of  periodicals  and  tracts.  In  many  societies,  both 
state  and  local,  the  financial  burden  was  borne  by  the  officers 
with  little  assistance  from  the  rank  and  file.  In  New  York, 
for  example,  the  state  society  was  kept  solvent  for  seven 
years  through  the  generosity  of  Edward  C.  Delavan,  who 
used  personal  funds  to  pay  deficits  that  exceeded  three 
thousand  dollars  annually.1 

As  the  societies  multiplied,  requests  for  lecturers  and  oi- 
ganizers  increased,  but  there  was  little  money  available  with 
which  to  meet  the  demand.  Some  of  the  older  organizations 
supported  agents  who  eked  out  their  salaries  by  taking  up 
special  collections  in  the  communities  they  visited.  Their 
number  never  was  large,  however,  and  their  time  was  often 
spent  in  trying  to  secure  sufficient  funds  to  meet  their  travel¬ 
ling  expenses.  As  a  result  the  missionary  activities  of  the 
societies  came  to  depend  more  and  more  upon  gratuitous 
labour,  and  it  was  generally  understood  that  whoever  worked 
for  the  temperance  cause  accepted  a  sort  of  financial  martyr¬ 
dom.  In  1840  Dr.  Charles  Jewett,  secretary  of  the  Massa¬ 
chusetts  Temperance  Union,  persuaded  his  organization  to 
revise  its  constitution  in  order  to  place  its  finances  on  a 
sound  basis.  A  plan  was  adopted  which  resulted  in  the 
enrollment  of  several  thousand  members,  each  pledged  to 
pay  one  dollar  annually,  so  long  as  he  was  able.  In  con¬ 
sideration  of  the  regular  support  thus  given  the  Union, 
every  member  received  a  subscription  to  the  official  organ, 
The  Temperance  Journal.  Unfortunately  few  societies 

1  Mass.  Spy,  Aug.  24,  1836;  Sixth  Annual  Report  of  the  American 
Temperance  Society  (1833);  P.  T.  D.,  II,  303.  The  Massachusetts 
Society  for  the  Suppression  of  Intemperance  was  an  exception  to  the 
rule.  Its  members  paid  a  two  dollar  membership  fee. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  225 

followed  the  lead  of  Massachusetts  in  formulating  a  new 
system,  and  haphazard  methods  continued  to  hinder  effective 
work.  Even  the  enthusiasts  who  were  responsible  for  the 
Washingtonian  revival  received  little  support  from  the 
treasuries  of  established  organizations.  They  secured  their 
expense  money  and  salaries  from  the  people  among  whom 
they  laboured,  and  there  is  little  evidence  that  they  found  the 
venture  highly  profitable.2  Such  popular  lecturers  as 
Hawkins  and  Gough,  of  course,  were  able  to  demand  more 
than  a  living  wage  for  their  services,  but  Gough  tells  us  in 
his  autobiography  that  he  lectured  for  two  years  without 
earning  enough  to  pay  his  expenses.3 

If  the  temperance  organizations  often  felt  the  pinch  of 
poverty,  it  was  not  because  of  extravagant  expenditures. 
One  is  impressed  in  reading  the  records  by  the  amount  of 
work  accomplished  with  funds  so  limited.  During  the  first 
ten  years  of  its  existence  the  New  York  State  Temperance 
Society,  the  most  active  of  the  state  associations,  printed 
and  distributed  more  than  12,000,000  copies  of  tracts  and 
periodicals  at  a  cost  of  less  than  one  cent  a  copy.  From 
the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of  these  publications  it  defrayed 
two-thirds  of  its  total  expenses  during  the  period.4  Prior 
to  1836  the  American  Temperance  Society  prepared  an¬ 
nually  a  report  of  approximately  one  hundred  pages,  which 
contained  a  survey  of  temperance  activity  in  all  parts  of  the 
world.  The  bulk  of  the  socicty^’s  funds  was  devoted  to  the 

2  Charles  Jewett,  The  Temperance  Cause;  Past,  Present  and  Future, 
pp,  27-28. 

s  Ibid.,  23-26;  Gough,  Autobiography,  pp.  247-248.  After  1853 
Gough’s  work  was  exceedingly  profitable. 

*  P.  T.  D.,  II,  29,  126.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  publications 
of  the  American  Tract  Society  for  its  first  ten  years  did  not  bulk 
much  larger  than  those  of  the  New  York  State  Temperance  Society 
during  a  similar  period  of  time.  Tenth  Annual  Report  of  the  American 
Tract  Society  (1835). 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


226 

gratuitous  distribution  of  these  reports,  sending  out  be¬ 
tween  twenty  and  twenty-five  thousand  a  year.5  When  the 
American  Temperance  Union  was  formed  in  1836,  its  ex¬ 
ecutive  committee  took  over  the  task  of  collecting  data  in 
regard  to  the  progress  of  reform,  but  the  reports  were  not 
so  widely  circulated  as  formerly.  The  Union,  attempting 
to  evolve  order  out  of  the  confusion  which  characterized  pub¬ 
licity  work,  centred  its  efforts  on  the  publication  of  periodi¬ 
cals,  leaving  the  printing  of  tracts  to  state  and  local  so¬ 
cieties.  Its  resources,  never  more  than  $10,000  in  any  one 
year,  enabled  it  not  only  to  support  a  central  office  in  New 
York  City  writh  Rev.  John  Marsh  in  charge,  but  also  to 
distribute  monthly  5000  copies  of  the  Journal  and  20,000 
of  the  Youth's  Temperance  Advocate,  in  addition  to  an 
annual  sale  of  50,000  temperance  almanacs.6 

In  the  dissemination  of  information  and  opinion  state  and 
local  societies  received  valuable  assistance  from  the  American 
Tract  Society.  Almost  one-tenth  of  the  tracts  issued  by 
the  Society  prior  to  1833  were  standard  temperance  pub¬ 
lications,  such  as  Benjamin  Rush’s  Inquiry  into  the  Effects 
of  Ardent  Spirits  and  Justin  Edwards’  The  Well  Conducted 
Farm.  For  the  convenience  of  those  who  desired  a  more 
permanent  record  of  this  pamphlet  literature  a  small  volume 

6  Sixth  Annual  Report  of  the  American  Temperance  Society  (1833). 
The  society  seldom  received  more  than  $5000  in  any  one  year. 

B  P.  T.  D.,  II,  271,  303,  Eighth  Report ,  p.  3.  Between  1840  and  1850 
there  were  never  fewer  than  thirty  weekly  and  monthly  temperance 
journals  in  circulation.  Of  these  the  more  important  monthlies  were: 
Temperance  Journal  and  Total  Abstinence  Gazette,  Boston;  Journal, 
New  York;  Youth’s  Temperance  Advocate,  New  York;  Pennsylvania 
Temperance  Recorder,  Philadelphia;  Star,  Richmond;  Advocate,  St. 
Louis;  Ohio  Temperance  Advocate,  Columbus;  South  Carolina  Temper¬ 
ance  Advocate,  Columbia;  Banner,  Penfield,  Ga.  The  well  known 
weeklies  were:  New  England  Washingtonian,  Boston;  Essex  Washing¬ 
tonian,  Lynn,  Mass.;  Columbia  Washingtonian,  Pludson,  N.  Y. ;  Organ, 
New  York;  Maryland  Temperance  Herald,  Baltimore.  See  Clark, 
op.  cit.,  pp.  201-224,  for  an  excellent  bibliography  of  temperance 
papers  in  Massachusetts. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  227 

of  twenty  of  the  best  essays  was  published  in  1839,  but  its 
sale  was  not  large.  Much  more  in  demand  were  the  single 
tracts,  five  million  of  which  had  been  sold  by  the  Tract  So¬ 
ciety  between  1825  and  1856. 7  In  the  latter  year  this  fea¬ 
ture  of  publicity  work  received  additional  support  from  the 
Order  of  the  Sons  of  Temperance,  which  decided  to  set  aside 
a  portion  of  its  reserve  funds  to  be  used  in  the  distribution  of 
a  new  series  of  pamphlets.8 

In  this  propagandist  literature  the  appeal  of  the  reformers 
was  fully  developed.  Although  to  the  present-day  reader 
it  may  seem  to  be  a  parading  of  the  obvious  in  the  garb 
of  hyperbole,  a  century  ago  it  represented  the  earnest  desire 
of  many  devoted  people  to  arouse  public  opinion  against  a 
great  social  evil.  Taking  their  cue  from  the  writings  of 
Dr.  Benjamin  Rush,  the  temperance  publicists  were  de¬ 
termined  that  their  fellows  should  at  least  be  enlightened 
as  to  the  physiological  effects  of  intemperance.  With  little 
thought  of  scientific  investigation  they  generalized  from 
unusual  incidents  which  came  to  their  attention,  often  ac¬ 
cepting  as  evidence  that  which  they  wished  to  believe.  They 
endeavoured,  whenever  possible,  to  bolster  up  their  own  con¬ 
clusions  with  impressive  citations  from  the  writings  of 
European  and  American  medical  authorities.  Indeed,  their 
so-called  expository  treatises  were  not  so  much  an  analysis 
of  the  effects  of  intoxicating  liquors  on  the  human  mind  and 
body,  as  a  dogmatic  statement  that  ardent  spirits  caused 
a  large  proportion  of  the  physical  and  mental  ailments  to 
which  mankind  wras  heir. 

Not  only  the  drunkard,  who  might  be  expected  to  pay  for 

7  The  Temperance  Volume  of  the  American  Tract  Society  (1839) ; 
Twenty-fifth  Annual  Report  of  the  American  Tract  Society  (1850); 
Eighth  Annual  Report  of  the  American  Tract  Society  (1833).  An 
anonymous  tract  with  the  intriguing  title,  One  Glass  More,  proved 
most  popular,  800,000  copies  being  sold  in  twenty  years. 

s  The  first  tract  in  the  Sons  of  Temperance  series  was  written  by 
Horace  Greeley. 


228  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

his  excesses,  but  also  the  moderate  drinker  was  subject  to  the 
baneful  reaction  of  the  poison,  alcohol.  Of  course,  he  did 
not  suffer  so  much  as  his  less  abstemious  fellows,  but  there 
was  no  escaping  the  consequences  of  his  indulgence. 
Though  the  day  of  reckoning  might  be  long  postponed,  it 
would  bring  the  greater  toll  of  misery.  Present  appearance 
of  health  did  not  signify  permanent  immunity.  As  to  the 
nature  of  these  ills  to  which  even  the  temperate  drinker 
was  a  prey,  the  reformers  were  exceedingly  explicit.  One 
explanation  was  given  by  Edward  Hitchcock,  professor  of 
chemistry  and  natural  science  in  Amherst  College,  in  his 
essay  addressed  to  students : 

God  has  given  to  the  animal  constitution,  a  capacity  to  exert 
an  amount  of  physical  power,  much  superior  to  what  is  necessary 
for  ordinary  occasions.  The  key  to  this  store  house  of  strength 
is,  in  the  excitability  of  the  system ;  and  this  is  put  into  requisi¬ 
tion  by  the  action  of  alcohol.  Alcohol  does  not  create  any  new 
physical  power;  it  merely  rouses  into  action  that  which  already 
exists  in  the  constitution.  .  .  .  That  secret  energy,  which  nature 
has  in  reserve  for  seasons  of  great  bodily  and  mental  effort,  is 
thus  prodigally  and  irretrievably  wasted.  The  friends  of 
temperance  are  very  frequently  urged  to  point  out  any  bad 
effects,  resulting  to  a  man’s  constitution,  from  a  very  moderate 
and  prudent  use  of  ardent  spirit  or  wine.  In  the  statement  just 
made,  we  have  the  answer.  The  premature  exhaustion  which  is 
thus  infallibly  produced,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  renders 
the  individual  peculiarly  liable  to  the  attacks  of  violent  and 
dangerous  disorders.  He  is  seized  with  fever,  or  dropsy,  or 
apoplexy;  but  never  suspects  that  his  prudent  use  of  ardent 
spirit  or  wine  is  the  cause.® 

Less  restrained,  but  more  specific,  was  the  statement  of 
Dr.  Thomas  Sewall,  professor  of  anatomy  and  physiology  in 

9  Edward  Hitchcock,  An  Essay  on  Alcoholic  and  Narcotic  Substances, 

pp.  20-21. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  229 

Columbian  College,  Washington,  D.  C.  Of  the  fate  in  store 
for  the  habitual  drinker,  lie  wrote: 

Dyspepsia,  jaundice,  emaciation,  corpulence,  dropsy,  ulcers, 
rheumatism,  gout,  tremors,  palpitation,  hysteria,  epilepsy,  palsy, 
lethargy,  apoplexy,  melancholy,  madness,  delirium-tremens,  and 
premature  old  age,  compose  but  a  small  part  of  the  catalogue  of 
diseases  produced  by  ardent  spirit.  Indeed,  there  is  scarcely 
a  morbid  affection  to  which  the  human  body  is  liable,  that  has 
not,  in  one  way  or  another,  been  produced  by  it;  there  is  not  a 
disease  but  it  has  aggravated,  nor  a  predisposition  to  disease 
which  it  has  not  called  into  action;  and  although  its  effects  are 
in  some  degree  modified  by  age  and  temperament,  by  habit  and 
occupation,  by  climate  and  season  of  the  year,  and  even  by  the 
intoxicating  agent  itself ;  yet,  the  general  and  ultimate  con¬ 
sequences  are  the  same.10 

In  describing  the  effects  of  excessive  use  of  distilled  liquors 
the  reformers  threw  all  qualifying  phrases  aside.  No  laws 
of  nature  operated  with  greater  regularity  and  precision 
than  the  laws  of  intemperance.  The  career  of  the  habitual 
drunkard  was  everywhere  the  same.  Its  succession  of  hor¬ 
rible  excesses  constituted  a  form  of  suicide,  the  more  terrible 
because  death  was  preceded  by  excruciating  mental  and  phys¬ 
ical  torture.  Fortunate  was  the  victim  who  sank  into  an 
untimely  grave  before  he  had  been  bereft  of  reason,  or  de¬ 
prived  of  his  physical  powers.  But,  in  spite  of  these  awful 
warnings,  temperate  drinkers  were  constantly  furnishing  re¬ 
cruits  for  the  ranks  of  the  intemperate.  Benjamin  Rush’s 
estimate  at  the  opening  of  the  century  that  the  toll  of  in- 
10  Thomas  Sewall,  Effects  of  Intemperance  on  the  Intellectual,  Moral 
and  Physical  Powers,  pp.  11-12.  For  similar  opinions  see  Mark  Tucker, 
A  Plea  for  Entire  Abstinence,  pp.  12-13;  R.  D.  Mussey,  An  Address  on 
Ardent  Spirit,  pp.  5-6;  John  Marsh,  Putnam  and  the  Wolf,  pp.  15-16. 
The  pathology  of  intemperance  was  also  set  forth  in  elaborate  drawings 
prepared  by  Dr.  Sewall,  which  showed  the  effect  of  alcohol  on  the 
vital  organs.  These  drawings  reproduced  in  coloured  plates  were  widely 
used  by  temperance  speakers.  See  P.  T.  D.,  Seventh  Report,  p.  4, 
Eighth  Report,  p.  4. 


230  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

temperance  in  the  United  States  was  four  thousand  lives 
annually  no  longer  represented  the  real  situation.  In  1825, 
according  to  the  statistics  of  the  temperance  propagandists, 
between  ten  and  fifteen  thousand  died  prematurely  from  the 
effects  of  using  ardent  spirits.  Ten  times  as  many  habitual 
drunkards  were  well  started  toward  the  same  fate,  and  more 
than  a  million,  who  called  themselves  temperate  drinkers,  had 
taken  the  first  step.  These  figures  were  appalling.  Ten 
thousand  deaths!  The  late  war  between  the  United  States 
and  Great  Britain,  said  the  reformers,  had  taken  an  annual 
toll  of  less  than  five  hundred  lives.  The  scourge  of  yellow 
fever,  so  devastating  in  1793,  had  claimed  less  than  four 
thousand  victims.  Yet  here  was  a  malady  that  killed  its 
ten  thousand  and  more  every  year  without  apparently 
arousing  the  anxiety  of  the  nation.  Was  it  not  time  for 
united  action  against  the  ravages  of  the  destroyer?  11 

Preserved  in  this  literature  dealing  with  the  pathology  of 
intemperance  is  a  curious  and  amusing  evidence  of  the 
credulity  of  enthusiasm.  The  “spontaneous  combustion” 
theory,  which  Charles  Dickens  used  so  ingeniously  in  Bleak 
House  to  explain  the  mysterious  disappearance  of  the  no¬ 
torious  Mr.  Krook,  seems  to  have  been  accepted  by  the  tem¬ 
perance  reformers  after  1827.  In  that  year  Jonathan 
Kittredge,  a  reformed  drunkard,  delivered  an  address  before 
a  public  meeting  in  Lyme,  New  Hampshire,  in  which  he  dis¬ 
cussed  fatalities  caused  by  intemperance. 

This  death  [said  he]  happens  in  various  ways.  Some  are 
killed  instantly;  some  die  a  lingering,  gradual  death;  some 

11  John  G.  Palfrey,  Discourses  on  Intemperance,  pp.  5-7;  David 
Pickering,  The  Effects  of  Intemperance,  pp.  8-9;  Jonathan  Kittredge, 
An  Address  upon  the  Effects  of  Ardent  Spirits,  pp.  7-9;  Albert  Barnes, 
Essays  on  Intemperance,  pp.  4—5;  Joel  Parker,  An  Address  delivered 
before  the  Association  in  Keene,  pp.  12-13;  Francis  Wayland,  An 
Address  before  the  Temperance  Association,  pp.  4—5;  Daniel  Dow, 
A  Discourse  before  the  Gloucester  Temperance  Society,  pp.  5-6. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  231 

commit  suicide  in  fits  of  intoxication,  and  some  are  actually 
burnt  up.  I  read  of  an  intemperate  man  a  few  years  since, 
whose  breath  caught  fire  by  coming  in  contact  with  a  lighted 
candle,  and  he  was  consumed.  At  the  time,  I  disbelieved  the 
story,  but  my  reading  has  since  furnished  me  with  well  authen¬ 
ticated  cases  of  a  combustion  of  the  human  body  from  the  use 
of  ardent  spirits.  Trotter  mentions  ten  such  cases,  and  relates 
them  at  length.  They  are  attended  with  all  the  proof  we  re¬ 
quire  to  believe  any  event.  They  are  attested  by  living  witnes¬ 
ses,  examined  by  learned  men,  and  published  in  the  journals  of 
the  day  without  contradiction.12 

Within  the  next  few  years  this  version  of  death  from  in¬ 
temperance,  based  on  reported  cases  which  the  medical 
journals  considered  extraordinary,  was  widely  accepted  as  an 
effective  argument  against  the  use  of  ardent  spirits.13  The 
Journal  of  the  American  Temperance  Union  in  1837  pub¬ 
lished  several  articles,  presenting  instances  of  spontaneous 
combustion  listed  in  the  Dictionaire  de  Medecine  as  having 
occurred  between  1692  and  1829. 14  Perhaps  the  most  im¬ 
pressive  statement  of  the  theory,  however,  appeared  in  the 
lectures  delivered  by  President  Eliphalet  Nott  to  the  student 
body  of  Union  College  during  the  winter  term  of  1838. 

When  a  few  years  since  [said  Dr.  Nott]  a  case  of  spontaneous 
combustion,  occurring  in  the  person  of  an  habitual  drunkard,  was 

12  In  his  essay  on  drunkenness  the  eminent  English  physician,  Thomas 
Trotter,  inserted  without  comment  an  article  by  Pierre  Aime  Lair, 
which  appeared  in  the  Journal  de  Physique  in  1799.  See  Thomas 
Trotter,  An  Essay  on  Drunkenness,  pp.  69-94;  Jonathan  Kittredge, 
op.  cit.,  p.  9. 

is  Instances  of  spontaneous  combustion  were  cited  in  the  Georgia 
Journal,  May  15,  1830.  The  Massachusetts  Spy  for  May  12,  1830,  noted 
that  Dr.  Peter  Scofield  of  Johnstown,  Upper  Canada,  had  reported  the 
case  of  a  man  roasted  from  head  to  foot  because  of  the  combustion 
of  ardent  spirits.  See  also  Thomas  Sewall,  op.  cit.,  p.  8;  R.  D.  Mussey, 
op.  cit.,  p.  8. 

14  Journal,  March,  1837,  p.  40,  October,  1837,  p.  145. 


232  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

referred  to  in  a  temperance  address  by  a  distinguished  layman, 
it  was  generally  regretted.  Few  of  the  friends  of  temperance 
were  prepared  to  endorse  what  then  seemed  to  them  so  im¬ 
probable  a  statement,  while  the  manufacturers  and  vendors  and 
drinkers  of  this  fiery  element  took  occasion  to  proclaim  more 
loudly  than  ever  the  folly  and  fanaticism  of  men  who  could  be 
so  weak  themselves  as  to  believe,  and  so  impertinent  as  to  attempt 
to  impose  on  others  the  belief  of  such  ridiculous  occurrences. 
But  these  cases  of  the  death  of  drunkards  by  internal  fires, 
kindled  often  spontaneously  in  the  fumes  of  alcohol,  that  escape 
through  the  pores  of  the  skin — have  become  so  numerous  and  so 
incontrovertible,  that  I  presume  no  person  of  information  will 
now  be  found  to  call  the  reality  of  their  existence  in  question.15 

In  support  of  this  statement  Dr.  Nott  cited  a  score  of 
cases  reported  by  reputable  journals  in  Europe  and  America. 
In  every  instance  the  victim,  usually  an  aged  woman,  bad 
been  long  addicted  to  the  use  of  ardent  spirits  and  wine. 
Ignition  of  the  alcoholic  fumes  was  traceable  in  most  of  the 
cases  to  a  lamp,  pipe  or  stove,  but  several  exceptions  proved 
that  combustion  might  take  place  without  the  presence  of  an 
external  agent.  Their  will  to  believe  so  far  transcended  the 
reasonable  objections  to  this  theory  that  the  temperance 
forces  presented  it  in  pamphlet  and  periodical  as  the  extreme 
penalty  which  the  intemperate  might  be  called  upon  to  pay. 
What  mattered  it  that  none  of  them  had  ever  witnessed  a 
case  in  point?  At  any  moment  the  dread  destroyer  might 
take  its  victim  from  their  very  midst.10 

In  the  cholera  epidemic  of  1832  the  reformers  found 
further  proof  of  the  deadly  effect  of  intemperance.  From 

is  Eliphalet  Nott,  Lectures  on  Temperance,  pp.  197-201. 

io  Enquirer,  August,  1846,  p.  170.  The  Pennsylvania  Temperance 
Recorder  for  February,  1836,  appeared  with  scare  headlines.  Fire! 
Fire!  Blood  on  Fire!,  as  the  caption  of  an  article  which  stated  that 
Dr.  J.  C.  Hanson  of  South  Berwick,  Maine,  on  bleeding  a  common 
drunkard  had  applied  a  match  to  the  blood  with  the  result  that  it 
burned  for  thirty  seconds  with  a  blue  flame. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  283 

Albany  the  Temperance  Recorder  sent  out  extras  and  broad¬ 
sides  urging  abstinence  from  the  use  of  all  intoxicants  as 
the  only  safeguard  against  the  prevailing  disease.  Every 
case  in  the  city,  which  resulted  fatally,  was  investigated  by 
temperance  workers.  Their  report  showed  that  of  the  three 
hundred  and  thirty-six  who  died  during  the  summer  months, 
only  two  were  members  of  temperance  societies,  while  but 
five  others  practised  abstinence  from  distilled  liquors.  In 
New  York  City  conditions  were  similar.  Records  of  Park 
Hospital  indicated  that  six  out  of  two  hundred  and  four 
cholera  patients  were  abstainers.  Taking  these  figures  as 
a  text,  the  Commercial  Advertiser  charged  that  the  ravages 
of  the  epidemic  in  the  city  could  be  explained  on  no  other 
basis  than  the  presence  of  four  thousand  grog-shops.  In 
Washington,  D.  C.,  the  board  of  health  forbade  the  sale  of 
ardent  spirits  for  a  period  of  ninety  days  as  a  precaution 
against  the  spread  of  the  disease.  Reports  from  Montreal, 
after  1200  had  suffered  from  the  malady,  stated  that  not  a 
drunkard  who  had  been  attacked  had  recovered,  and  that 
almost  all  the  victims  had  been  at  least  moderate  drinkers. 
It  seemed  to  the  temperance  propagandists  as  if  the  cholera 
was  a  scourge  of  Providence  to  aid  the  cause  of  temperance. 
Its  deadly  effect  in  the  case  of  the  drunkard  became  a  strik¬ 
ing  warning  to  the  moderate  drinkers,  urging  them  to  accept 
the  principle  of  abstinence.17 

Though  arguments  based  on  considerations  of  health 
bulked  large  in  the  temperance  propaganda,  the  various 
appeals  to  economic  interest  received  an  even  wider  circula¬ 
tion  at  the  hands  of  the  reformers.18  Periodicals  were  filled 
with  articles,  similar  to  those  of  Jeremiah  Evarts  in  the 

17  N.  Y.  Commercial  Advertiser  cited  in  Mass.  Spy,  June  27,  1832; 
Temp.  Recorder,  June  5,  1832,  p.  30,  November  5,  p.  8;  P.  T.  D.,  I, 
96—97,  280-281.  See  also  Nathan  S.  S.  Beman,  The  Influence  of  Ardent 
Spirits  in  the  Production  of  the  Cholera. 

is  The  religious  phase  of  the  temperance  propaganda  has  been  dis¬ 
cussed  in  Chapter  VI. 


234  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

Panoplist  during  1810,  which  stressed  the  cost  of  intem¬ 
perance  to  the  community.  Spokesmen  for  the  reform, 
basing  their  calculations  on  conditions  in  their  respective 
districts,  estimated  the  total  liquor  bill  for  the  nation  and 
described  the  grave  consequences  of  such  an  expenditure.19 
In  their  opinion  the  waste  of  money  involved  in  purchasing 
a  commodity  so  harmful  to  the  consumer  was  less  deplorable 
than  the  burden  thereby  imposed  on  the  tax-payer.  Since 
the  responsibility  of  the  liquor  traffic  for  poverty  and  crime 
could  he  easily  demonstrated,  the  tax-payer’s  assessments 
for  the  maintenance  of  work -houses  and  jails,  of  poor-houses 
and  asylums,  were  in  large  part  chargeable  to  intemperance. 
Statistics  from  charitable  and  penal  institutions  were  a  rich 
mine  of  information  in  support  of  this  point.  The  records  in 
general,  said  the  propagandists,  revealed  that  seventy-five 
per  cent  of  those  whose  lives  had  been  wrecked  could  trace 
their  misfortune  directly  or  indirectly  to  alcoholic  bev¬ 
erages.20  A  significant  confirmation  of  this  contention  was 
contained  in  a  voluminous  report  published  by  the  New 
York  State  Temperance  Society  in  1834.  Through  the 
generosity  of  a  wealthy  member  of  the  Society,  Samuel 
Chipman  had  been  employed  to  investigate  county  poor- 
houses  and  jails,  and  the  state  institutions  of  a  similar 
character.  His  task  was  not  to  record  his  impressions,  but 
to  secure  facts  from  whatever  records  were  available.  The 
care  with  which  he  collected  his  data  and  compiled  the 

is  Cf.  J.  G.  Palfrey,  op.  cit.,  32-33,  38;  Jonathan  Kittredge,  op.  cit., 
pp.  7-8;  Journal  of  Humanity,  Feb.  10,  1831;  W.  Cranch,  An  Address 
delivered  at  the  annual  meetiny  of  the  Washington  City  Society,  pp. 
4-8.  In  1831  Judge  Cranch,  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  published 
his  famous  estimate  of  the  financial  loss  suffered  by  the  nation  through 
the  traffic  in  ardent  spirits.  He  estimated  the  nation’s  annual  liquor 
bill  at  $48,000,000. 

2 0  Plain  Facts  Addressed  to  the  Inhabitants  of  Boston  (1834); 
Mass.  Spy,  Feb.  16,  1831;  P.  T.  D.,  I,  45;  L.  M.  Sargent,  Address 
delivered  at  the  Beneficent  Congregational  Meeting  House,  July  4>  1838, 
p.  11;  Delaware  Gazette,  Jan.  20,  1843. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  235 

results  made  his  report  a  valuable  contribution  to  temper¬ 
ance  literature. 

From  the  superintendent  of  each  institution  he  visited 
Mr.  Chipman  secured  a  signed  statement  which  contained  a 
summary  of  the  information  possessed  by  the  authorities 
relative  to  the  proportion  of  crime  and  poverty  caused  by 
intemperance.  An  analysis  of  these  returns  indicated  that 
in  every  county  at  least  sixty  per  cent  of  the  men  and  women 
held  on  criminal  charges  were  habitually  intemperate,  while 
in  some  sections  the  percentage  was  even  higher.  With  few 
exceptions  at  least  fifty  per  cent  of  the  inmates  of  each 
county  poor-house  testified  that  the  use  of  spirituous  liquors 
was  the  cause  of  their  poverty.  Furthermore,  a  general  av¬ 
erage  of  governmental  expenditures  throughout  the  state 
showed  that  more  than  two-thirds  of  the  county  taxes  were 
appropriated  annually  to  defray  the  cost  of  criminal  justice 
and  poor  relief.21  So  important  were  Mr.  Chipman’s  con¬ 
clusions,  and  so  well  documented,  that  his  report  was  used  by 
organizations  in  all  parts  of  the  country  as  an  effective 
exposition  of  the  costliness  of  the  liquor  traffic.22 

Besides  such  appeals  to  tax-payers  a  great  many  economic 
arguments  were  levelled  at  employers  of  labour.  Circulars 
addressed  to  proprietors  and  superintendents  of  manufactur¬ 
ing  establishments  emphasized  particularly  the  relation 
between  total  abstinence  and  labour  efficiency.  Wherever 
the  temperance  principle  had  been  applied  in  an  industrial 
enterprise,  said  the  reformers,  it  had  tended  to  increase  the 
profits  of  the  business.  This  fact  had  been  demonstrated 
by  a  constantly  increasing  group  of  employers  who  enforced 
restrictions  against  the  use  of  intoxicants  during  working 
hours.  The  reasons  for  it  were  obvious.  Temperate  work¬ 
men  were  capable  of  more  productive  labour  in  a  day’s  time 

21  Report  of  an  examination  of  poor-houses,  jails,  etc.,  in  the  State 
of  New  York,  By  Samuel  Chipman. 

22  P.  T.  D.,  I,  397-402;  Journal,  February,  1840,  p.  21. 


236  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

than  intemperate  workmen.  The  loss  of  property  owing  to 
negligence  of  employees  was  greatly  reduced,  and  the  inter¬ 
ruption  of  operations  because  of  incapacitated  help  was 
practically  eliminated.  The  problem  of  labour  turnover  was 
less  serious,  since  fewer  men  were  discharged  as  a  result  of 
intemperate  habits.  Furthermore,  sober  employees  were 
whiling  to  co-operate  with  the  management  to  make  the  busi¬ 
ness  a  success,  for  they  realized  that  their  own  prosperity 
depended  upon  the  profits  of  their  employer.23  So  ran  the 
arguments  designed  to  win  the  support  of  the  rising  “cap¬ 
tains  of  industry.” 

The  reformers  believed  that  the  most  powerful  factor 
in  the  promotion  of  temperance  among  the  wage-earning 
class  was  the  self-interest  of  the  employer.  Their  records, 
so  they  said,  indicated  that  business  men  were  being  converted 
to  the  principle  of  abstinence  because  of  its  important  bear¬ 
ing  on  labour  efficiency.  With  increasing  frequency  em¬ 
ployers  of  labour  were  demanding  that  their  employees  re¬ 
frain  from  the  use  of  spirituous  liquors.  These  hopeful 
signs,  however,  were  not  used  as  an  excuse  for  failure  to 
bring  the  temperance  cause  directly  to  the  attention  of  the 
wage-earner.  Mechanics  and  artisans,  clerks  and  shop- 
workers  were  confronted  with  the  spectre  of  unemployment. 
They  were  reminded  that  in  times  of  industrial  depression  it 
was  the  intemperate  man  who  first  lost  his  job.  When 
business  was  prospering,  it  was  the  sober  man  who  accumu¬ 
lated  a  surplus  against  the  inevitable  hard  times.  Since 
total  abstinence  meant  increased  profits  for  the  employer, 
it  brought  to  the  worker  higher  wages,  promotion  and, 

28 P.  T.  D.,  II,  18-24;  Am.  Quart.  Temp.  Mag.,  August,  1833, 
pp.  220-224.  A  publication  from  the  press  of  the  American  Tem¬ 
perance  Union  maintained  that  if  all  manufacturing  establishments 
in  the  United  States  adopted  the  principle  of  total  abstinence,  no 
protective  tariff  would  be  necessary.  The  cost  of  production  would 
be  sufficiently  reduced  to  permit  competition  with  all  parts  of  the 
world. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  237 

finally,  financial  independence.  Its  blessings  fell  upon  rich 
and  poor  alike.24 

The  fact  that  the  nation  was  still  predominantly  agri¬ 
cultural  was  reflected  in  the  bulk  of  literature  devoted  to  the 
interests  of  the  farmer.  Almanacs  were  published  by  the 
American  Temperance  Union  and  several  state  societies  for 
sale  and  free  distribution  in  the  rural  districts.  Of  the 
numerous  tracts  designed  to  carry  a  special  appeal  to  the 
farming  classes  Justin  Edwards’  The  Well  Conducted  Farm 
long  retained  its  popularity.  Written  in  1825,  this  brief 
essay  contained  the  arguments  so  frequently  repeated  in 
various  forms  during  the  next  generation.  It  related  the 
experience  of  a  Massachusetts  landowner  who  decided  to 
operate  his  six  hundred  acre  farm  without  the  use  of  spirit¬ 
uous  liquors.  Though  his  neighbours  assured  him  that  he 
W’ould  be  unable  to  secure  help  on  such  terms,  he  found  that 
by  paying  his  men  a  dollar  more  each  month  he  was  able 
to  hire  as  many  as  he  needed.  All  the  hands  were  pledged 
to  abstain  from  the  use  of  ardent  spirits.  At  the  end  of  a 
year  the  proprietor  had  tangible  evidence  of  the  value  of 
his  experiment.  The  benefit  to  the  men  was  noticeable  in 
an  increased  vigour  and  activity,  in  the  performance  of  the 
same  labour  without  the  usual  fatigue,  and  in  the  greater 
amount  of  money  which  they  were  able  to  save  from  their 
wages.  The  employer  profited  because  more  work  had  been 
accomplished  than  in  any  preceding  year.  His  barns  and 
other  improvements  were  in  splendid  condition,  and  his  land 
had  never  before  been  so  productive.25 

24  For  a  specimen  of  these  appeals  see  Letter  to  the  Mechanics  of 
Boston  (1831);  Circular  to  Immigrants  (1833).  A  scheme  similar 
to  modern  advertising  methods  was  used  in  1833.  A  wholesaler  in 
New  York  City  who  marketed  250,000  sheets  of  sandpaper  each  year 
offered  to  print  a  temperance  argument  on  the  back  of  each  sheet  if 
the  state  society  would  provide  the  copy.  Temp.  Recorder,  March  5, 
1833. 

zsjustin  Edwards,  The  Well  Conducted  Farm  (Andover,  1825). 


238  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

This  simple  narrative  and  many  similar  tracts  were  widely 
circulated,  but  the  reformers  realized  that  one  important 
aspect  of  the  farmer’s  relation  to  the  liquor  problem  had 
not  been  sufficiently  stressed.  This  deficiency  they  at¬ 
tempted  to  correct  through  temperance  periodicals.  Fre¬ 
quent  appeals  were  sent  out  to  the  growers  of  grain,  urging 
them  to  cease  furnishing  rye  and  corn  to  the  distilleries. 
One  journal  presented  the  matter  in  this  light: 

Farmers,  every  bushel  of  grain  you  sell  to  the  distilleries  is  to 
you  in  the  end  a  dead  loss.  You  may  try  the  experiment  ten 
years,  growing  each  year  400  bushels  of  rye  and  corn,  and  selling 
it  to  the  distillery,  and  at  the  end  of  the  ten  years  you  will  be 
poorer  than  when  you  commenced.  But  cease  to  furnish  rye 
and  corn  to  the  distiller,  feed  them  out  to  your  cattle  and  hogs, 
and  three  things  will  be  the  result.  1.  The  market  will  be 
supplied  with  beef  and  pork  of  good  quality,  instead  of  that 
which  is  inferior  and  diseased.  This  will  increase  the  value  of 
these  articles  in  the  market.  2.  If  there  is  any  profit,  the  farmer 
will  receive  it,  and  thus  receive  a  fair  compensation  for  his  labor. 
3.  A  death  blow  will  be  struck  to  the  business  of  manufacturing 
ardent  spirit,  a  business  ultimately  injurious  to  individuals,  to 
society  and  to  the  world.28 

Farmers  who  read  this  appeal  must  have  been  impressed 
more  by  the  zeal  of  the  writer  than  by  the  economic  validity 
of  his  suggestions.  It  is  doubtful  whether  such  arguments 
persuaded  many  that  it  was  good  business  to  refuse  a  cash 
price  for  their  grain  in  order  to  gamble  for  higher  profits 
in  the  live-stock  market.  Still,  the  temperance  journals 
continued  their  campaign  without  much  variation  in  their 
attack.  The  scarcity  of  foodstuffs  following  the  bad  har¬ 
vests  of  1836,  however,  gave  an  added  significance  to  their 
articles  on  the  wasteful  consumption  of  grain.  The  Pennsyl- 

28  Temp.  Recorder,  Oct.  2,  1832,  p.  59.  See  also  Pa.  Temp.  Rec., 
April,  1835,  p.  12,  September,  1836,  p.  77. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  289 

vania  Temperance  Recorder  ran  a  cartoon  of  a  distillery 
under  the  caption  “The  Bread  Eater.”  The  distilleries 
of  the  United  States,  so  the  explanatory  paragraphs  stated, 
used  11,000,000  bushels  of  grain  each  month,  enough  to 
make  20,000  barrels  of  flour.  This  was  going  on  at  a  time 
when  the  cry  for  bread  was  heard  in  all  parts  of  the  land.27 
The  New  York  Journal  of  Commerce  was  responsible  for  the 
charge  that  importations  of  foreign  breadstuffs  were  being 
diverted  to  distillers  and  brewers,  who  paid  a  high  price 
in  order  to  obtain  what  they  required.28  According  to 
estimates  in  the  Boston  Recorder  the  grain  consumed  in  one 
year  by  the  manufacture  of  spirituous  liquors  was  sufficient 
to  provide  the  American  people  with  food  for  four  months. 
It  seemed  contrary  to  the  public  welfare  to  permit  such  a 
condition  of  affairs  when  flour  was  selling  for  $12  a  barrel 
and  bread  cost  six  cents  a  pound.29  The  editor  of  the 
Pennsylvania  Temperance  Recorder  was  positive  that  the 
liquor  problem  was  responsible  for  all  the  country’s  ills. 
The  high  price  of  foodstuffs,  the  industrial  depression  and 
the  financial  stringency  were  forms  of  punishment  visited 
upon  the  people  because  of  their  intemperance.  “A  nation,” 
said  he,  “which  has  rioted  as  we  have  upon  the  bounties  of 
Providence,  which  has  so  wickedly  converted  the  grains  and 
the  fruits  of  heaven  into  the  drink  of  the  drunkard,  and 
squandered  one  hundred  million  annually  to  the  most  de¬ 
based  appetite ; — must  expect  to  be  scourged  for  its  sins.”  30 
Not  all  of  the  temperance  propaganda  was  cast  in  the 
form  of  exposition  or  argument.  As  the  novelty  of  the 
reform  wore  off,  it  became  necessary  to  make  the  usual  ap¬ 
peals  more  attractive.  Temperance  journals  came  to  de¬ 
pend  largely  on  imaginative  writing  to  hold  the  interest  of 
n  Pa.  Temp.  Bee.,  January,  1837,  p.  1. 

2*  Cited  in  Pa.  Temp.  Bee.,  January,  1837,  p.  8. 

29  Ibid.,  May,  1837,  p.  40;  Journal,  March,  1837,  pp.  35-37. 

3|>  Pa.  Temp.  Bee.,  June,  1837,  p.  44. 


240  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

their  readers.  Poetry  and  fiction  crowded  out  the  material 
of  an  earlier  day.  Stories  dealing  with  unrequited  love, 
poverty,  disease  and  death,  fashioned  after  the  same  model 
as  other  early  attempts  at  the  American  short  story,  were 
nothing  more  than  thinly  disguised  presentations  of  tem¬ 
perance  platitudes.  Verses  of  little  merit  recounted  in 
rhymed  metre  the  blessings  of  sobriety.  As  a  special  feature 
for  the  ladies  several  periodicals  ran  serial  stories,  tales  of 
such  saccharine  morality  that  they  merited,  and  sometimes 
achieved,  a  place  in  the  columns  of  Godey’s  Lady’s  Book.31 
Although  this  fiction  was  generally  the  work  of  mediocre 
writers,  occasionally  a  short  sketch  appeared  by  some  author 
destined  to  win  fame.  The  Temperance  Almanac  for  1843 
contained  “A  Rill  from  the  Town  Pump”  by  Nathaniel 
Hawthorne,  which  no  doubt  seemed  appropriate  to  “the 
cold  water  men.”  A  narrative  by  John  G.  Whittier  setting 
forth  the  effects  of  intemperance  was  featured  in  the  Organ 
for  November  30,  1844. 

During  the  decade  of  the  forties  a  few  publishers,  as  much 
interested  in  reform  as  in  profits,  presented  propaganda  in 
the  form  of  temperance  gift  books,  that  particular  product 
of  the  publisher’s  art  being  at  the  height  of  its  vogue.  In 
1847  William  Sloanaker  of  Philadelphia  announced  The 
Fountain,  a  temperance  annual  edited  by  Hastings  Weld, 
“in  Turkey  morocco  binding  with  gilt  edges  and  back.” 
The  volume  contained  eight  mezzotint  embellishments  en¬ 
graved  especially  for  it  by  the  elder  Sartain.32  There  were 
poems  by  John  G.  Whittier  and  Lydia  Huntley  Sigourney; 
short  articles  by  Horace  Greeley  and  Bayard  Taylor;  and 
stories  by  Fanny  Forrester  and  Timothy  S.  Arthur.  The 
Philadelphia  Enquirer  said  of  it :  “The  volume  is  indeed 
chaste,  choice  and  elegant — and  fully  equals  in  literary 

si  For  example  see  Qodey’s  Lady’s  Boole,  files  1842-3. 

32  The  reference  is  to  John  Sartain,  the  English  artist,  one  of  the  first 
to  introduce  the  mezzotint  style  of  engraving  in  the  United  States. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  241 
treasures  as  well  as  appropriate  illustrations  any  annual 
that  we  have  met  with  for  a  long  time.  Temperance,  moral¬ 
ity  and  elegance  are  here  combined,  and  in  a  form  at  once 
tempting,  attractive  and  unexceptionable.” 33  Less  pre¬ 
tentious  was  the  gift  book  published  the  same  year  by  Geoi’ge 
W.  Briggs  of  Boston.  The  compilers,  J.  G.  Adams  and  E. 
H.  Chapin,  designed  their  little  work  as  a  pocket  manual, 
“a  home  friend,  or  travelling  companion  to  the  lover  of 
temperance.”  Several  poems  by  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  and 
Nathaniel  P.  Willis  somewhat  compensated  for  the  mediocrity 
of  the  remainder  of  its  literary  offering.34 

In  the  selection  of  material  for  publication  the  interests 
of  the  boys  and  girls  in  the  “cold  water  armies”  were  not 
neglected.  Periodicals  intended  primarily  for  adults  found 
space  for  children’s  stories  whenever  suitable  copy  was  at 
hand.  The  American  Sunday  School  Union  included  in  its 
series  for  Sunday  School  libraries  several  collections  of 
juvenile  temperance  tales.35  In  1840  Charles  Jewett,  ex¬ 
ecutive  secretary  of  the  Massachusetts  Temperance  Union, 
edited  two  volumes  which  he  hoped  would  supply  a  “deficiency 
in  the  Sabbath  school  library,  as  well  as  in  private  libraries 
of  parents  and  such  as  are  entrusted  with  the  education  of 
youth.”  36  Realizing  that  there  was  quite  enough  unmeaning 
trash  on  the  market  in  the  form  of  books  for  children,  he  had 
attempted  to  prepare  works,  he  said,  which  would  exert  a 
salutary  influence  on  youthful  minds.  His  Temperance  Toy 
was  a  series  of  rather  clever  parodies  of  well-known  nursery 
rhymes  and  jingles.  The  Youth's  Temperance  Lecturer 

33  The  Fountain  (Philadelphia,  1847),  pp.  4^5. 

3*  The  Fountain,  edited  by  J.  G.  Adams  and  E.  H.  Chapin,  pp.  44-45, 
247-248.  There  is  no  record  to  indicate  how  profitable  such  ventures 
were  for  the  publishers. 

ss  For  example  see  John  Hall,  The  Harvey  Boys  (Philadelphia,  1834); 
Cyrus  Mann,  The  Clinton  Family  (Boston,  1833);  Hy  Native  Village 
(New  York,  1844). 

36  Charles  Jewett,  The  Temperance  Toy;  also  Youth’s  Temperance 
Lecturer,  p.  3. 


242  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

was  intended  for  older  children.  It  contained  fifteen  cheap 
engravings  portraying  the  causes  and  effects  of  drunkenness, 
each  picture  being  fully  explained  in  prose  and  verse. 
Among  the  exhibits,  which  no  doubt  appealed  to  the  boys, 
were  the  still,  the  wine-press,  the  grog-shop  and  the  tavern 
bar.  Mr.  Jewett  may  have  believed  that  children  can  govern 
the  habits  of  their  parents.  At  any  rate  he  was  careful  to 
impress  his  youthful  readers  with  the  disadvantages  of 
having  a  drunken  father.  Of  the  boys  and  girls  who  were  so 
unfortunate  he  wrote: 

He  drives  them  off,  to  toil  all  day 
And  a  part  of  the  weary  night, 

And  takes  their  hard-earned  pennies  away. 

And  at  the  bar  will  he  daily  stay 
To  drink,  and  curse  and  fight. 

Shoeless,  over  the  frozen  ground 
His  wretched  children  go ; 

And  away  he  staggers  to  where  the  sound 
Of  drunken  revel  is  ringing  around, 

To  taste  the  cup  of  woe.37 

A  similar  attempt  to  provide  literature  for  the  young 
temperance  advocate  was  responsible  for  The  Boy's  Tem¬ 
perance  Book ,  edited  in  1848  by  John  Marsh.  Marsh’s 
work,  however,  was  not  so  successful  as  that  of  Jewett,  for 
he  apparently  lacked  an  understanding  of  what  the  child 
mind  could  appreciate.  The  Boy's  Book  with  the  exception 
of  a  few  dialogues  was  composed  of  extracts  from  speeches 
and  magazine  articles  prepared  for  mature  readers.  One 
can  scarcely  imagine  anything  more  uninteresting  to  the 

37  Youth’s  Temperance  Lecturer,  p.  25.  Matthew  D.  Finn's  Moral  and 
Temperance  Table  Book  instructed  its  young  readers  in  the  elementary 
principles  of  arithmetic  and  penmanship  and  at  the  same  time  warned 
them  against  the  dangerous  influence  of  intoxicants. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  243 

normal  boy.38  This  same  fault  was  evident  in  the  first 
periodical  designed  “to  gain  the  hearts  and  guide  the  habits 
and  practices  of  the  young.” 39  In  1839  the  executive 
committee  of  the  American  Temperance  Union  had  decided 
that  the  Youth's  Temperance  Advocate  should  be  issued 
monthly,  under  the  editorship  of  John  Marsh.  The  little 
journal  fell  far  short  of  gaining  the  hearts  of  the  boys  and 
girls.  The  idea  of  the  editor  and  his  associates  seems  to 
have  been  that  by  inserting  the  phrase,  “now  dear  children,” 
any  commonplace  material  clipped  from  other  temperance 
publications  could  be  made  attractive  to  the  juvenile  reader. 
Although  the  paper  was  circulated  extensively  through  the 
agency  of  the  Sunday  School  unions,  one  doubts  whether  the 
children  who  received  it  took  the  trouble  to  carry  it  home.40 

One  of  the  most  interesting  specimens  of  early  temperance 
fiction  is  a  novel  published  by  the  artist  and  playwright, 
William  Dunlap,  in  1836.  The  author  had  never  been  a 
total  abstainer,  but  at  the  age  of  seventy  he  became  an  ar¬ 
dent  temperance  advocate.  In  Thirty  Years  Ago;  or,  The 
Memoirs  of  a  Water  Drinker  he  combines  a  great  deal  of 
material  drawn  from  his  own  experience  and  observation  with 
some  of  the  standard  temperance  arguments  of  his  day. 
The  novel  is  in  part  autobiographical,  but  many  of  the  more 
exciting  incidents  are  taken  from  the  life  of  Dunlap’s 
friend,  the  English  actor,  George  Frederick  Cooke,  whose 
career  was  so  pitifully  marred  by  intemperate  drinking. 
Several  of  the  scenes  are  laid  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Old  Park 
Theatre  in  New  York  City,  which  Dunlap  knew  so  well. 
Undoubtedly,  the  author’s  association  with  the  theatre  and, 

88  John  Marsh,  The  Boy’s  Temperance  Book,  pp.  63-104. 

39  Youth’s  Temperance  Advocate,  I,  1. 

Ibid.,  files  for  1839-1841.  The  Cold  Water  Army,  a  weekly  es¬ 
tablished  by  Isaac  F.  Shepard  in  Boston,  September,  1841,  was  an  ad¬ 
mirable  children’s  periodical.  The  Temperance  Offering,  published  at 
Salem,  Massachusetts,  for  a  few  years  after  1845  contained  an  excellent 
youth’s  department. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


244 

particularly,  his  friendship  with  Cooke  were  important  fac¬ 
tors  in  convincing  him  of  the  manifold  evils  of  intemperance. 

Zebediah  Spiffard,  the  hero  of  Thirty  Years  Ago,  is  an 
under-sized,  red-haired  comedian,  who  at  the  opening  of  the 
story  is  about  to  wed  the  lady  of  his  choice.  Though  he 
knows  it  not,  both  his  fiancee  and  her  mother  are  addicted  to 
the  use  of  liquor  in  immoderate  quantities.  As  a  result 
Spiffard’s  marital  career  progresses  none  too  happily  for 
him,  for  his  pet  aversion  is  the  use  of  alcoholic  beverages. 
This,  of  course,  gives  the  hero  opportunity  for  frequent 
moralizing,  which  not  only  interrupts  the  action,  but  also 
dulls  the  reader’s  interest.  Episode  follows  episode  in  a 
rather  disconnected  fashion,  each  one  serving  to  present  some 
new  horror  connected  with  the  drink  evil.  Some  of  the  de¬ 
scriptions  are  exaggerated  to  the  point  of  absurdity,  yet 
none  are  intended  to  be  caricatures.  The  novel  is  probably 
the  least  praise-worthy  of  Dunlap’s  numerous  literary  ef¬ 
forts.  One  critic  has  even  characterized  it  as  an  “inferior 
specimen  of  Sunday  school  fiction.”  41  This  may  be  a  fair 
appraisal  of  its  worth  from  the  standpoint  of  the  literary 
craftsman,  but  it  does  not  take  into  account  the  book’s 
propaganda  value.  By  the  public  it  was  well  received,  the 
newspapers  carrying  uniformly  favourable  criticisms.  In 
fact,  so  rapidly  did  the  first  edition  sell  that  the  author 
found  it  necessary  to  bring  out  a  second  edition  in  1837. 42 

More  influential  than  William  Dunlap,  however,  in  the 
development  of  temperance  fiction  between  1830  and  1850 
was  Lucius  Manlius  Sargent.  With  him  in  the  first  rank 
also  belong  Lydia  Huntley  Sigourney  and  Timothy  Shay 
Arthur.  While  none  of  their  works  will  stand  the  severe 
tests  of  the  critic,  they  are  excellent  examples  of  effective  at¬ 
tempts  to  further  moral  reform  among  the  American  people. 

Oral  S.  Coad,  William  Dunlap,  pp.  274-279. 

42  William  Dunlap,  Memoirs  of  a  Water  Drinker  (New  York,  1837). 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  245 

Sargent’s  contribution  is  perhaps  the  most  impressive  be¬ 
cause  of  its  bulk  and  its  influence.  Lucius  Manlius  Sargent 
was  the  youngest  son  of  Daniel  Sargent,  a  prosperous  Bos¬ 
ton  merchant.  In  1801  at  the  age  of  fifteen  he  entered 
Phillips-Exeter  Academy  to  prepare  for  college,  having  pre¬ 
viously  enjoyed  several  years  of  study  under  the  tutelage  of 
Rev.  Jesse  Appleton,  later  president  of  Bowdoin.  This 
kindly  preceptor  of  his  youth  had  opened  to  him  the  treas¬ 
ures  of  the  classics  and  quickened  his  interest  in  good  liter¬ 
ature.  At  Harvard  Sargent  gave  good  account  of  his  early 
training.  During  two  years  in  residence  he  distinguished 
himself  as  a  classicist,  but  he  did  not  remain  to  finish  his 
course.  In  1806  he  began  the  study  of  law  in  the  office 
of  Samuel  Dexter.  Like  Appleton,  Dexter  was  concerned 
over  the  prevalence  of  intemperance  in  the  country,  and  the 
young  student  in  his  office  heard  considerable  discussion  of 
methods  to  curb  the  evil.  Perhaps,  it  was  during  these 
years  that  Sargent  decided  to  devote  his  literary  talent, 
which  he  was  constantly  improving,  to  the  cause  of  temper¬ 
ance.  At  any  rate,  when  he  inherited  a  competence  from 
his  father’s  estate,  he  abandoned  the  practice  of  law  and 
turned  his  entire  attention  to  philanthropic  enterprises. 
For  more  than  thirty  years  he  wrote  and  spoke  in  favour 
of  total  abstinence,  always  advocating  any  method,  coer¬ 
cive  or  persuasive,  that  would  break  the  power  of  the  liquor 
traffic.43 

Although  Sargent’s  lectures  were  frequently  printed  and 
widely  distributed,  his  most  effective  appeals  were  made 
through  the  medium  of  fiction.  In  1835  the  Massachusetts 
Temperance  Society  published  a  small  volume  containing 
three  of  his  stories,  “My  Mother’s  Gold  Ring,”  “The  Stage- 
Coach”  and  “Groggy  Harbor.”  The  warm  reception  ac- 

43  John  H.  Sheppard,  Reminiscences  of  Lucius  Manlius  Sargent,  pp. 
7-16. 


246  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

corded  this  initial  offering  convinced  the  author  that  he  had 
discovered  the  way  to  reach  a  large  reading  public,  and  he 
continued  to  write  in  the  same  vein.  Within  the  next  fifteen 
years  he  prepared  eighteen  more  stories,  but  even  this  num¬ 
ber  was  insufficient  to  meet  the  demands  made  upon  him. 
The  original  three  went  through  more  than  one  hundred 
editions  and  were  translated  into  several  foreign  languages. 
While  the  stories  usually  appeared  first  in  some  temperance 
periodical,  they  were  collected  from  time  to  time  and  re¬ 
printed  by  numerous  societies.  A  large  edition  of  six  vol¬ 
umes  was  printed  for  the  American  Temperance  Union  in 
1848  to  supply  the  demand  in  the  United  States  and  Great 
Britain.44 

The  popularity  of  these  Temperance  Tales  seems  to  prove 
that  there  was  a  widespread  interest  in  the  subject  of  tem¬ 
perance,  for  they  were  not  of  such  literary  merit  as  to  at¬ 
tract  unusual  notice.  Sargent  drew  the  tone  of  his  stories 
from  the  conventional  English  fiction  of  the  period.  With 
few  exceptions  his  plots,  if  a  series  of  incidents  may  be  called 
a  plot,  were  uninteresting  and  unconvincing.  They  served 
as  a  pretext  for  much  shallow  moralizing  with  its  normal 
accompaniment  of  over-wrought  sentimentality.  Occasional 
use  of  the  mysterious  and  horrible  suggested  the  novels  of 
Charles  Brockden  Brown,  while  a  few  characterizations  in 
some  of  the  later  tales  might  have  been  crude  imitations  of 
Dickens’  art.45  In  spite  of  their  imperfections,  however,  the 
Temperance  Tales  were  a  distinct  success,  for  they  reached 
readers  who  found  in  them  inspiration  to  labour  more  dili¬ 
gently  for  the  cause.  Their  author,  though  not  a  literary 
genius,  possessed  certain  qualities  essential  to  the  production 

44  Sheppard,  op.  cit.,  pp.  17-22;  Documents  and  Records  of  the  Masses 
chusetts  Temperance  Society,  pp.  99-100. 

4j5  The  characters  in  “The  Temperance  Meeting  in  the  Village  of 
Tattertown”  remind  one  of  Mr.  Pickwick’s  select  circle.  Temperance 
Tales,  VI,  173-293. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  247 

of  great  literature:  sincerity,  forthright  directness  of  pur¬ 
pose,  and  the  desire  to  move  men  to  action.46 

Scarcely  less  noteworthy  than  Sargent’s  stories  was  the 
contribution  of  Lydia  Huntley  Sigourney.  Both  as  a  writer 
and  an  editor  she  made  herself  an  energetic  champion  of  all 
movements  for  moral  reform.  Born  in  Norwich,  Connecti¬ 
cut,  September  1,  1791,  Lydia  Huntley  was  heir  to  the  en¬ 
nobling  influences  that  pervaded  the  finer  type  of  New 
England  home.  In  the  life  of  her  immediate  family  she 
saw  exemplified  those  domestic  virtues,  which  in  later  years 
were  so  often  the  subject  of  her  thought  and  writing.  A 
schooling,  made  possible  bv  the  kindness  of  a  wealthy  friend, 
enabled  her  to  become  proficient  in  Latin  literature  and  the 
English  classics.  Having  decided  in  her  nineteenth  year 
that  teaching  was  to  be  her  life  work,  she  opened  a  select 
school  for  girls  in  Chelsea.  So  successful  was  this  venture 
that  in  1814  several  residents  of  Hartford  persuaded  her 
to  establish  a  similar  school  in  that  city.  During  the  next 
five  years  she  became  a  leader  in  the  educational  and 
social  life  of  Hartford,  but  her  career  as  a  teacher  was  inter¬ 
rupted  by  her  marriage  in  1819  to  Charles  Sigourney,  a 
wealthy  merchant  who  was  also  a  student  of  literature  and 
art. 

After  her  marriage  Mrs.  Sigourney  devoted  what  time 
she  could  spare  from  domestic  duties  to  the  development  of 
her  literary  talents.  She  was  less  interested,  however,  in 
achieving  perfection  in  her  art  than  in  using  her  ability  for 
the  advancement  of  philanthropic  enterprises.  The  calls 
made  upon  her  by  friends,  by  charitable  organizations  and 
by  patriotic  societies  wei’e  answered  so  far  as  her  physical 

40  Besides  the  stories  already  mentioned  the  following  had  a  wide 
circulation  as  single  pamphlets:  Margaret's  Bridal,  The  Life  Preserver, 
Fritz  Ilazell  and  Kitty  Grafton.  The  Life  Preserver  portrayed  the 
dangers  of  granting  spirit  rations,  while  the  other  three  attacked  the 
use  of  wine  and  cider, 


248  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

powers  permitted.  Her  published  writings  numbered  fifty- 
seven  volumes,  and  contributions  to  newspapers  and  maga¬ 
zines  must  have  bulked  almost  as  large.  The  result,  as  she 
herself  stated,  was  that  she  wrote  too  much  to  achieve  dis¬ 
tinction  either  in  invention  or  in  style.  But  the  popularity  of 
her  works,  both  in  this  country  and  in  Great  Britain,  is  suf¬ 
ficient  evidence  that  her  offering  was  not  considered  mediocre 
by  her  readers.47 

Mrs.  Sigourney’s  support  of  temperance  principles  was 
closely  associated  with  her  concern  for  the  preservation  of 
the  American  home.  Since  she  was  opposed  to  any  custom 
or  practice  that  tended  to  destroy  the  harmony  and  hap¬ 
piness  of  family  life,  the  use  of  intoxicants  never  met  with 
her  approval.  Regarding  intemperance  as  one  of  the  chief 
causes  of  marital  unhappiness,  she  denounced  the  vice  in 
prose  and  poetry.  During  the  two  decades  prior  to  1850 
her  lyrics  and  stories  frequently  appeared  in  the  regular 
temperance  publications,  while  occasionally  the  editorship  of 
a  gift  volume  gave  her  an  opportunity  to  introduce  selec¬ 
tions  of  temperance  fiction.48  In  1847,  at  the  suggestion  of 
the  Scottish  Temperance  League  in  Edinburgh,  she  collected 
the  best  of  her  writings  on  the  subject  and  published  them 
under  the  title  of  Water-Drops.  The  volume  was  intended 
particularly  for  women,  “to  propitiate  their  influence  in  the 
structure  of  domestic  life,  against  a  foe  that  lays  waste  their 
dearest  hopes,  and  to  quicken  them  in  impressing  upon  the 
tender  minds  committed  to  their  charge  the  subjugation  of 

Mrs.  L.  H.  Sigourney,  Letters  of  Life,  pp.  5-49;  E.  B.  Hunting- 
ton,  “Lydia  H.  Sigourney,”  in  Eminent  Women  of  the  Age,  James 
Parton,  editor,  pp.  85-101;  Grace  L.  Collin,  “Lydia  Huntley  Sigourney,” 
in  New  England  Magazine,  XXVII,  15-30. 

Journal,  files  1839-1841.  The  following  gift  books  which  she  edited 
contain  temperance  material:  The  Religions  Souvenir  (1840)  and  The 
Young  Ladies’  Offering  (1848).  For  her  own  contributions  see  Poems 
(1834),  Boy’s  Reading  Boole  in  Prose  and  Poetry  (1839),  and  “The 
Widow  and  Her  Son,”  in  The  National  Temperance  Offering  (1851), 
pp.  241-264. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  249 
the  appetites,  and  the  wisdom  and  beauty  of  self-control.”  49 

Like  most  of  her  other  prose,  Mrs.  Sigourney’s  temper¬ 
ance  stories  are  exceedingly  sentimental.  While  the  plots 
are  uniformly  more  ingenious  than  those  used  by  Sargent, 
the  style  seems  unnatural  and  stilted.  The  affected  conver¬ 
sation  of  the  characters  often  clashes  unpleasantly  with  the 
scene  in  which  the  action  is  set,  usually  some  simple  Ameri¬ 
can  home.  Modern  critics  have  either  found  much  to  con¬ 
demn  in  this  fiction  or  have  ignored  it  entirely.  We  must 
remember,  however,  that  the  extent  of  Mrs.  Sigourney’s  in¬ 
fluence  is  not  to  be  gauged  by  the  fleeting  character  of  her 
fame.  Any  study  of  manners  and  morals  in  the  United 
States  during  the  mid-nineteenth  century  must  chronicle  the 
unusual  power  which  she  wielded  as  an  author  and  editor.50 

In  1836,  while  Mrs.  Sigourney  was  serving  as  associate  ed¬ 
itor  of  Godey’s  Lady’s  Book,  the  stories  of  Timothy  Shay 
Arthur  began  to  appear  in  the  columns  of  that  popular 
monthly.  At  the  time  Mr.  Arthur  was  trying  out  his  ability 
in  order  to  decide  whether  he  should  make  writing  his  vo¬ 
cation.  The  background  of  his  early  life  seemed  to  be  all 
against  such  a  decision.  His  schooling  in  Baltimore,  which 
became  his  home  after  his  parents  left  Newburg,  New  York, 
in  1817,  had  not  been  satisfactory  to  himself  or  his  parents. 
Teachers  in  the  private  school  which  he  attended  pronounced 
him  an  unusually  stupid  boy  and  advised  his  father  to  ap¬ 
prentice  him  to  some  trade.  In  1822,  therefore,  his  educa¬ 
tion,  so  far  as  school  was  concerned,  came  to  an  end.  But 
Arthur  believed  that  he  had  not  received  proper  instruction 
and  determined  to  continue  his  studies.  At  the  age  of  thir¬ 
teen  he  sacrificed  pleasure  and  recreation  in  order  to  spend 
his  leisure  time  reading.  By  his  own  efforts  he  managed  to 
master  the  elements  of  grammar  and  make  some  progress 

o  Letters  of  Life,  p.  354. 

bo  Mrs.  Sigourney  was  an  associate  editor  of  Godey’s  Lady’s  Book 
from  1836  to  1849. 


250  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

with  arithmetic,  but  steady  application  injured  his  sight. 
Forced  to  give  up  his  trade,  he  secured  a  position  in  a  mer¬ 
cantile  establishment  where  his  duties  were  so  light  that  he 
had  a  great  deal  of  time  to  himself.  During  the  three  years 
that  he  remained  with  the  firm  he  wrote  several  stories  which 
were  published  in  local  journals.  In  1833  he  accepted  a 
position  as  western  agent  for  a  Baltimore  banking  company, 
but  the  institution  failed  within  a  few  months  and  he  re¬ 
turned  to  the  city  out  of  employment.51 

Fortunately,  Arthur  soon  received  an  offer  to  undertake 
the  editorial  work  for  a  literary  magazine,  the  Baltimore 
Athenaeum,  which  he  accepted.  As  the  salary  was  small,  he 
sought  to  increase  his  income  by  writing  fiction.  The  en¬ 
couragement  which  he  received  from  Mrs.  Sigourney  and  the 
possibility  of  selling  his  stories  to  Godey's  Lady's  Booh  seem 
to  have  affected  his  style  at  this  period.  A  marked  tendency 
toward  sensationalism  disappeared,  and  in  its  place  came  a 
fondness  for  sentimental  situations.  Each  story  was  de¬ 
signed  to  enforce  some  moral  truth.  Since  the  subject 
matter  usually  dealt  with  the  obligations  and  rewards  of 
family  life,  the  themes  were  by  no  means  easy  to  develop 
without  the  intrusion  of  a  false  note.  The  superficial  fash¬ 
ion  in  which  the  relation  of  husband  and  wife,  of  mother  and 
child,  was  treated  leads  one  to  suspect  the  author  of  in¬ 
sincerity.  But  the  tales  must  have  rung  true  to  Arthur’s 
contemporaries,  for  they  were  of  a  sort  with  the  fiction 
published  by  periodicals  which  enjoyed  a  wide  circulation.52 

His  career  as  a  writer  was  well  begun  when  the  Washing¬ 
tonian  revival  in  Baltimore  aroused  Arthur’s  interest  in 
temperance  reform.  Although  he  had  been  a  member  of  the 
first  temperance  society  in  the  city,  he  had  never  taken  any 
part  in  its  activity.  A  few  visits  to  the  testimony  meet- 

si  T.  S.  Arthur,  Illustrated  Temperance  Tales  (1850),  pp.  3-7. 

52  T.  S.  Arthur,  His  Life  and  Works,  By  One  Who  Knows  Him;  pp. 
11-17.  For  Arthur’s  style  see  Advice  to  Young  Ladies  on  their  duties 
and  conduct  in  life;  also  Godey’s  Lady’s  Book,  files  for  1839-1842. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST 


251 

ings  of  the  Washingtonians  inspired  him  to  write  a  story, 
Six  Nights  with  the  Washingtonians,  which  favourably  ad¬ 
vertised  the  newT  movement.  After  1841,  when  he  moved  to 
Philadelphia  in  order  to  establish  closer  connections  with 
journals  and  publishers  in  that  city,  Arthur  continued  to 
write  for  temperance  papers  and  other  periodicals  interested 
in  the  reform.  His  serial  story,  “The  Temperance  Pledge,” 
was  featured  in  several  issues  of  the  Delaware  Gazette  in 
1842,  while  the  Organ  for  1845  contained  a  number  of  his 
contributions.  During  this  period  he  edited  several  gift 
books  in  which  he  included  extracts  from  his  previous  writ¬ 
ings.53  In  1850  a  number  of  these  pieces  were  published 
in  Philadelphia  as  Illustrated  Temperance  Tales,  a  souvenir 
volume  for  the  friends  of  the  cause.  Though  Arthur  is  re¬ 
membered  to-day  for  his  Ten  Nights  in  a  Bar-Room,  which 
appeared  in  1853,  one  suspects  that  his  fame  has  endured 
more  because  of  the  story’s  title  than  because  of  its  merit. 
More  widely  sold  than  any  of  the  other  tales,  it  represents 
neither  the  author’s  best  style,  nor  his  most  convincing  argu¬ 
ments.64 

A  story  in  the  National  Temperance  Offering,  edited  by 
Timothy  S.  Arthur  in  1850,  is  typical  of  the  sentimental, 
moralizing  fiction  of  the  period.  In  “Love’s  Eclipse”  by 
Clara  Lee  the  pathetic  ending  of  a  delightful  romance  is 
the  mainspring  of  the  plot.  Marian  Linvale,  one  of  the 
gentlest,  sweetest  girls  in  the  pleasant  little  village  of  Alder- 
ton,  had  promised  her  heart  and  hand  to  handsome,  high- 
spirited  Mark  Wilford,  son  of  the  venerable  Judge  Wilford. 
In  accordance  with  his  family’s  position  in  the  community 
it  was  necessary  for  Mark  to  go  to  Boston  for  his  college 

sz  Delaware  Gazette,  April  8,  15,  22,  1842;  T.  S.  Arthur,  A  Christmas 
Box  for  the  Sons  and  Daughters  of  Temperance;  Gift  of  Friendship 
(1849),  pp.  13-20;  Sons  of  Temperance  Offering  (1850),  pp.  47-61, 
184-196. 

54  T.  S.  Arthur,  Illustrated  Temperance  Tales;  Ten  Nights  in  a  Bar- 
Boom, 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


252 

education.  Being  a  gay-hearted  youth,  he  entered  with  zest 
into  the  free  life  of  his  college  chums,  earning  among  them 
an  enviable  reputation  as  a  jolly  good  fellow.  During  his 
first  vacation  he  returned  to  Alderton  and  called  to  see 
Marian,  inviting  her  to  accompany  him  on  a  drive  through 
the  country.  Not  far  from  the  village  was  a  quaint  way- 
side  inn,  at  which  the  lovers  stopped  for  refreshment.  De¬ 
spite  Marian’s  protests,  Mark  insisted  that  a  bottle  of  the 
best  pale  sherry  be  served  them  in  a  rustic  arbour  nearby. 
There,  over  his  wineglass  he  sang  her  one  of  Tom  Moore’s 
songs.  Though  Mark  realized  it  not,  Marian’s  spirit  was 
crushed  that  her  lover  should  care  as  much  for  his  wine  as 
he  did  for  her.  She  reproved  him  gently,  and  they  parted, 
never  to  see  each  other  again.  One  year  later  Mark  Wil- 
ford,  once  more  home  from  Boston,  stood  above  a  grassy 
hillock  beneath  which  his  former  sweetheart  slept.  Thus, 
by  a  few  glasses  of  pale  sherry,  love  had  been  eclipsed.55 

In  song  as  well  as  story  temperance  appeals  were  given 
full  expression.  The  practice  of  singing  hymns  at  meet¬ 
ings,  early  adopted  by  some  societies,  caused  a  demand  for 
verses  which  might  be  set  to  sacred  tunes.  John  Pierpont, 
pastor  of  the  Hollis  Street  Church  in  Boston,  composed  a 
number  of  temperance  odes  as  part  of  his  contribution  to  the 
reform.  Others  followed  his  lead,  till  in  1842  it  was  pos¬ 
sible  for  the  American  Temperance  Union  to  announce  a 
volume  of  hymns  and  songs  suitable  for  “temperance  meet¬ 
ings  and  cold  water  celebrations.”  56  As  the  gala  days  ob¬ 
served  by  the  reformers  grew  in  number,  the  output  of  musi¬ 
cal  propaganda  increased.  Selections  appropriate  for  anni¬ 
versaries,  Fourth  of  July  celebrations,  picnics  and  parades 
sold  rapidly.  The  Washingtonians  were  particularly  in¬ 
sistent  that  their  gatherings  should  be  enlivened  by  song. 
In  1845  appeared  the  Washingtonian  Teetotalers'  Minstrel 

55 National  Temperance  Offering,  T.  S.  Arthur,  editor. 

ss  Journal,  July,  1837;  Providence  Daily  Journal,  April  16,  1842. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST 


253 

with  such  touching  lyrics  as  “The  Rumseller’s  Lament,” 
“Dear  Father,  Drink  No  More,”  “Mother  Dry  that  Flow¬ 
ing  Tear”  and  “The  Drunkard’s  Wife’s  Lament.”  The 
latter  was  fittingly  set  to  the  tune  of  “Oft  in  the  Stilly 
Night.”  57  A  patriotic  song,  known  as  “Jonathan’s  Declar¬ 
ation  of  Independence,”  which  must  have  echoed  at  many  a 
Fourth  of  July  picnic,  was  scarcely  a  fair  sample  of  Rev. 
John  Pierpont’s  ability  as  a  poet.  It  was  sung  to  the  stir¬ 
ring  strains  of  “Yankee  Doodle.” 

Says  Jonathan,  says  he,  today 
I  will  be  independent. 

And  so  my  grog  I’ll  throw  away. 

And  that  shall  be  the  end  on’t. 

Clear  the  house,  the  tarnal  stuff. 

Shan’t  be  here  so  handy, 

Wife  has  given  the  winds  her  snuff, 

So  now  here  goes  my  brandy. 

And  now,  says  Jonathan,  towards  rum 
I’m  desperate  unforgiving, 

The  tyrant  never  more  shall  come 
Into  the  house  I  live  in. 

Kindred  spirits,  too,  shall  in- 
To  utter  darkness  go  forth, 

Whiskey,  Toddy,  Julep,  Gin, 

Brandy,  Beer,  and  so  forth.58 

While  the  Washingtonian  movement  was  sweeping  through 
the  country,  a  few  theatrical  managers  saw  in  it  the  possibil- 

57  Washingtonian  Teetotalers’  Minstrel  (1845).  See  also  Temperance 
Lyrics  (1844),  Songs  of  the  Washingtonians  (1845),  The  Fountain  Min¬ 
strel  (1846),  Temperance  Songster  (1846),  The  Mountain  Minstrel 
(1847). 

ss  Marsh,  Temperance  Recollections,  p.  161;  Washingtonian  Teeto¬ 
talers’  Minstrel, 


254  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

ity  of  increased  profits.  If  temperance  appeals  were  ef¬ 
fectively  dramatized,  they  reasoned,  popular  interest  in  the 
reform  would  insure  generous  returns  from  the  venture. 
Such  was  the  belief  of  the  manager  of  the  Boston  Museum  in 
1843,  when  he  secured  the  right  to  produce  The  Drunkard, 
or.  The  Fallen  Sated,  a  moral  drama  in  five  acts  adapted 
from  a  series  of  temperance  dialogues.  The  play  was  pro¬ 
duced  under  the  supervision  of  W.  H.  Smith,  an  actor  turned 
playwright,  who  also  took  the  leading  role.  On  February 
12,  1844,  the  first  performance,  given  before  an  enthusiastic 
audience,  assured  the  play’s  success.  A  phenomenal  run  of 
140  consecutive  performances  was  a  sufficient  testimonial  of 
public  interest  in  the  plot  and  its  effective  presentation.59 

The  Drunkard  contains  in  a  disguised  form  most  of  the 
appeals  that  had  long  proved  valuable  to  the  reformers. 
The  opening  scenes  in  the  home  of  a  young  couple  recently 
married  reveal  the  mainspring  of  the  action,  the  husband’s 
fondness  for  spirituous  liquors.  The  numerous  temptations 
in  the  pathway  of  youth,  the  easy  transition  from  temperate 
drinking  to  drunkenness,  the  terrors  of  delirium  tremens, 
the  physical  and  mental  suffering  of  the  drunkard’s  family; 
all  are  carefully  developed  as  the  play  progresses.  The 
climax  is  reached  when  the  young  husband,  penniless  and 
friendless,  is  prevented  from  committing  suicide  by  a  member 
of  a  temperance  society,  who  persuades  him  to  sign  the 
pledge.  Tragedy  is  averted,  the  pledge  works  its  magic  cure 
and  domestic  bliss  reigns  once  more  where  misery  and  pov¬ 
erty  so  lately  held  their  sway.  In  the  Boston  presentation, 
it  is  said,  the  portrayal  of  delirium  tremens  was  particu¬ 
larly  effective,  while  the  distress  of  the  drunkard’s  family 
brought  tears  to  the  eyes  of  many.  Probably,  the  play’s 

50  The  Drunkard,  or  the  Fallen  Saved.  (Boston,  1847);  Mary  F.  Ayer, 
Early  Days  on  Boston  Common,  p.  62.  Mrs.  Presbrey’s  Wax  Work  Ex¬ 
hibition  showing  in  Boston  at  the  time  contained  a  group  representing 
the  drunkard’s  family. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  255 

sentimental  theme,  rather  than  its  crudely  enforced  morali¬ 
zing,  accounts  for  its  unusual  success. 

The  apparent  popularity  of  temperance  drama  encour¬ 
aged  other  managers  and  producers  to  venture  into  the  field. 
Shortly  after  the  Drunkard  departed  from  the  Boston  Mu¬ 
seum,  One  Cup  More,  or  the  Doom  of  a  Drunkard  went  on 
the  boards  at  the  National  Theatre  in  the  same  city.  It, 
too,  was  successful,  though  not  so  well  written  as  the  former 
play.60  In  1847  the  Park  Theatre  in  New  York  City,  where 
Dunlap  had  secured  so  much  of  the  material  for  his  novel, 
housed  an  English  production  known  as  The  Bottle.  It  was 
a  drama  in  two  acts  with  a  plot  similar  to  that  of  The 
Drunkard.  Its  author,  Thomas  P.  Taylor,  had  received  his 
inspiration  from  several  drawings  by  George  Cruikshank, 
which  portrayed  conditions  in  a  home  wrecked  by  intemper¬ 
ance.  The  play’s  run  at  the  Park  seems  to  have  been  pro¬ 
longed  by  William  B.  Chapman’s  clever  performance  in  the 
comedy  role  of  Coddles,  a  potboy.61 

In  the  meantime  companies  of  strolling  players  had  found 
the  temperance  theme  popular.  In  1843  a  certain  Dr.  Rob¬ 
inson  and  several  Washingtonians  in  New  Hampshire  or¬ 
ganized  a  group  to  present  the  Moral  Exhibition  of  the  Re¬ 
formed  Drunkard.  They  sought  the  patronage  and  sup¬ 
port  of  temperance  advocates  by  advertising  the  fact  that 
a  percentage  of  the  proceeds  from  the  play  would  be  donated 
to  local  Washingtonian  societies.  In  Worcester,  Massachu¬ 
setts,  a  stronghold  of  temperance  sentiment,  they  were  well 
patronized  until  the  board  of  selectmen  stopped  their  per¬ 
formances.  This  action,  based  on  a  town  law  against 
theatrical  exhibitions  of  an}'  sort,  was  roundly  applauded 
by  the  officers  of  the  American  Temperance  Union.  In  an 
editorial  the  Journal  rebuked  those  who  were  trying  to 
further  temperance  principles  through  the  agency  of  the 

soMary  F.  Ayer,  op.  cit.,  p.  62;  Journal,  July,  1844,  p.  107. 

si  Thomas  P.  Taylor,  The  Bottle  (New  York,  1847). 


256  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

theatre.  The  temperance  cause,  said  the  editor,  “is  the 
cause  of  God  and  humanity,  and  needs  not  the  aid  of  buf¬ 
foonery,  mountebanks,  and  theatrical  exhibitions,  which  are, 
after  all,  money-making  affairs.”  62  In  spite  of  this  at¬ 
titude  on  the  part  of  the  national  organization,  Dr.  Rob¬ 
inson’s  company  continued  to  receive  the  support  of  tem¬ 
perance  people  in  many  of  the  cities  which  it  visited.  The 
argument  that  the  theatre  was  indecent  and  unscriptural, 
that  it  had  never  before  aided  moral  reform,  that  it  was 
only  doing  so  now  because  of  financial  returns  did  not  con¬ 
vince  all  reformers  of  the  danger  of  propaganda  in  the  form 
of  drama.  Whether  the  American  Temperance  Union  ap¬ 
proved  or  not,  some  societies  welcomed  theatrical  companies 
as  important  allies  in  the  work  of  reform.63 

Prior  to  1850  there  were  few  organized  efforts  to  discredit 
temperance  principles.  This  does  not  imply  that  the  re¬ 
formers  encountered  no  serious  opposition.  While  indiffer¬ 
ence  was  usually  their  greatest  enemy,  at  times  they  were 
forced  to  bear  the  brunt  of  formidable  attacks.  There  were, 
for  example,  such  works  as  Calvijn  Colton’s  Protestant 
Jesuitism  and  Bishop  Hopkins’  The  Primitive  Church  which 
carefully  analysed  and  criticized  the  principles  and  methods 
of  temperance  societies.  In  the  course  of  his  caustic  com¬ 
ments  on  the  propaganda  of  the  movement,  Colton  said: 

The  great  public,  busy  about  other  matters  and  their  private 
concerns,  but  finding  gratification  at  intervals  of  repose  in 
sympathizing  with  philanthropic  projects,  are  always  ready  to 
be  wrought  upon  by  an  adequate  machinery.  Voluntary  and 
hasty  organization  have  been  the  fashion  of  the  day.  Whatever 
is  started,  a  national  society  must  at  once  be  got  up,  which  is 
imposing  in  its  very  name;  a  list  of  respectable  names  must  be 
obtained,  as  members  and  patrons,  which  is  also  imposing  and 
influential;  a  secretary  and  an  adequate  corps  of  assistants  must 

« *  Journal,  August,  1843,  p.  125. 

83  Ibid.,  July,  1844,  p.  107,  August,  1845,  p.  121,  March,  1846,  p.  43. 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  257 

be  appointed  and  provided  for  from  the  first  fruits  of  collections ; 
a  band  of  popular  lecturers  must  be  commissioned,  and  sent 
forth  as  agents  on  the  wide  public;  the  press  with  its  many¬ 
winged  messengers,  is  put  in  operation;  certificates  fitted  for 
the  purpose  are  made  out,  submitted,  subscribed,  and  sworn  to; 
the  entire  machinery  is  put  in  operation;  subsidiary  societies  are 
multiplied  over  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land;  the  end 
proposed  is  manifestly  a  good  one;  and  how  can  the  community 
resist  the  sway  of  such  an  influence?  Nobody  feels  it  his  duty 
to  oppose,  for  the  cause  is  good;  everyone  believes,  because 
everybody  else  does;  credit  in  all  statements  goes  by  authority, 
not  by  conviction ;  the  prime  agents  believe,  first,  because  it  is 
their  business  and  next,  because,  having  told  the  story  so  long, 
they  have  no  doubt  of  its  truth;  new  discoveries  are  made,  new 
sophistries  invented,  new  facts  developed  on  hypothetical  state¬ 
ments;  tracts  and  books  are  written  and  find  a  ready  market; 
the  daily  and  weekly  journals  are  burdened  with  the  weight  of 
new  matter,  and  with  new  visions  or  representations  of  old;  it 
is  “line  upon  line,  and  precept  upon  precept,  here  a  little  and 
there  a  little” ;  the  heavens  above  and  the  depths  beneath,  fire, 
earth,  air,  wind,  and  water  are  ransacked,  and  fail  not  to  yield 
their  treasures  of  things  new  and  old.  In  a  word,  the  public  is  over¬ 
whelmed — literally  carried  by  storm — there  is  no  resisting  it. 
Thinking  is  out  of  the  question.  The  fashion  and  necessity  are, 
to  fall  in  with  the  current,  and  float  along  with  it.  It  is  the 
easiest  and  cheapest.  Who  can  stop  to  examine  such  an  accumu¬ 
lation — such  a  world  of  materials?  Who  so  presumptuous  as  to 
dissent  from  such  a  weight  and  amount  of  authority  ?  64 

Not  all  of  the  protests  were  so  ably  voiced,  but  their 
import  was  as  easily  understood.  At  a  meeting  called  to 
form  the  first  temperance  society  in  Providence,  Rhode 
Island,  an  opposition  group  secured  control  of  affairs  and 
voted  to  form  a  debating  society  instead.  In  Northamp¬ 
ton  County,  Pennsylvania,  an  attempt  in  1833  to  establish 
a  permanent  organization  among  the  temperance  people  was 
64  Colton,  Protestant  Jesuitism,  pp.  53-54. 


258  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

frustrated  by  a  mob.  In  southeastern  Pennsylvania  there 
was  considerable  anti-temperance  sentiment  among  the 
Germans.  This  was  particularly  true  of  Bucks,  Chester, 
York,  Adams  and  Cumberland  counties,  where  agents  of  the 
Pennsylvania  State  Society  found  it  difficult  to  arouse  any 
enthusiasm.65  The  editor  of  the  Doylestown  Democrat  was 
inclined  to  laugh  at  the  earnest  efforts  of  the  reformers. 
Of  total  abstinence  he  wrote : 

We  certainly  do  not  approve  of  the  present  system  of  anti- 
fogmatics,  phlegm-cutters,  mint  juleps,  and  the  whole  tribe  of 
liver  murdering  preparations  that  infest  our  country,  but  we 
hold  with  Anacreon,  Horace  and  Tom  Moore,  that  the  juice  of 
the  grape  is  not  to  be  eschewed.  We  are  poor  devils  of  humanity 
altogether,  and  if  a  glass  of  Champagne  or  Madeira  or  Port  will 
drive  away  the  clouds  ol  care,  why  should  we  not  indulge  it? 

Let  us  have  whiskey,  punch  and  mirth  and  laughter; 

Sermons  and  soda  water  the  day  after.68 

More  serious  in  tone  was  the  protest  that  came  from 
another  section  of  the  state.  On  March  14,  1834,  a  special 
meeting  at  Georgetown,  Mercer  County,  condemned  total 
abstinence  associations  as  organizations  subversive  of  gov¬ 
ernment  and  dangerous  to  society.  The  temperance  reform, 
said  the  resolutions,  destroyed  family  harmony,  setting 
father  against  son  and  brother  against  brother.  It  was  in 
reality  a  form  of  nullification,  since  it  ignored  the  laws  of 
the  state  which  sanctioned  the  trade  in  intoxicants.  These 
views  were  similar  to  those  expressed  by  an  anti-temperance 
conclave  at  Elizabeth  City  in  1833,  which  recorded  its 
abhorrence  of  the  whole  system  of  cant  and  hypocrisy  sym¬ 
bolized  by  the  temperance  pledge.67  Current  objections  to 

65  Pa.  Temp.  Bee.,  October,  1835,  p.  64,  November,  p.  71,  December, 
pp.  78-79. 

a®  Quoted  in  W.  H.  Davis,  Do-ylestown,  Old  and  New,  pp.  85-86. 

67” New  York  Evangelist,  Aug.  10,  1833;  History  of  Mercer  County, 
Pennsylvania  (Chicago,  1888). 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  259 
the  religious  aspect  of  the  reform  found  expression  in  a 
pamphlet  published  at  Richmond  in  1836  with  the  title 
Reasons  for  not  joining  the  Temperance  Society.68  The 
anonymous  author,  who  described  himself  as  a  clergyman, 
maintained  that  abstinence  had  nothing  in  common  with  tem¬ 
perance,  that  the  methods  of  the  reformers  tended  to  foster 
intolerance,  that  the  movement  was  using  Christian  churches 
as  mere  agencies  to  accomplish  its  ends,  that  the  harmony 
of  congregations  was  thereby  being  ruined  and  the  real 
mission  of  the  church  subordinated  to  a  temporary  interest 
in  moral  reform.69 

Occasionally  temperance  propaganda  involved  its  authors 
in  litigation  which  redounded  to  the  credit  of  the  cause.  A 
notable  case  in  point  was  that  of  the  libel  suit  arising  out 
of  the  publication  of  Deacon  Giles'  Distillery.  In  February, 
1835,  there  appeared  in  the  Salem  (Mass.)  Landmark  under 
the  caption  “Inquire  at  Amos  Giles’  Distillery”  an  allegorical 
narrative  of  unusual  occurrences  in  the  distillery  of  one 
Deacon  Amos  Giles.70  The  story  had  been  written  as  tem- 

68  Reasons  for  not  joining  the  Temperance  Society  (1836).  The 
pamphlet  was  published  the  »next  year  in  Baltimore. 

69  One  wonders  how  much  mute  antagonism  to  temperance  was 
represented  by  the  following  letter  to  the  Temperance  Recorder,  July, 
1835,  p.  51: 

Sir: — By  what  authority  you  continue  to  send  me  the  Temperance 
Recorder,  I  know  not.  One  thing  I  do  know,  which  is,  that  if  you  do 
not  like  to  have  them  returned  with  double  postage,  you  had  better 
wait  till  I  subscribe  before  you  send  me  another.  We  have  Anti- 
Masonry,  Anti-Bum,  Anti-Gin,  Anti-Brandy,  and  Anti-mind-their-own- 
business  people  enough  in  this  small  town,  without  aid  from  the 
Regency  city  [Albany].  Enclosed  you  have  your  “extra”  which,  per¬ 
haps,  you  will  want  for  some  one  you  can  more  easily  gull  than  Me. 

to  The  Dream,  or  Deacon  Giles’  Distillery  became  a  popular  piece 
of  temperance  fiction  as  a  result  of  this  widespread  publicity.  The 
story  related  how  Amos  Giles,  a  prominent  deacon  in  the  church  and 
treasurer  of  a  Bible  society,  had  quarreled  with  his  labourers  in  the 
distillery.  One  evening  as  he  was  sitting  in  his  counting  room  a  gang 
of  singular  fellows  appeared  and  offered  to  work  for  him  on  his 
own  terms.  These  new  workers  were  demons  in  disguise,  who  proceeded 


260  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

perance  fiction  by  Rev.  George  B.  Cheever,  a  Congregational 
clergyman  in  Salem,  with  too  great  fidelity  to  facts  known 
by  residents  of  the  town.  Deacon  John  Stone,  proprietor 
of  the  largest  local  distillery,  immediately  brought  suit  for 
libel,  contending  that  the  clergyman  had  resorted  to  fiction 
as  a  thin  veil  to  cover  an  unwarranted  attack  on  his  char¬ 
acter  and  the  good  repute  of  his  business.  The  case  was 
heard  before  the  Common  Pleas  Court  of  Essex  County, 
Peleg  Sprague  and  Rufus  Choate  representing  the  defendant. 
Their  defence  was  brilliant,  but  not  effective,  for  the  jury 
found  Cheever  guilty  on  the  strength  of  evidence  which 
established  identical  incidents  in  the  career  of  Deacon  John 
Stone  and  the  supposititious  Deacon  Amos  Giles.  Though 
Cheever  carried  his  case  to  the  state  Supreme  Court,  he  was 
not  so  much  interested  in  securing  a  favourable  decision  as  in 
advertising  the  evils  of  intemperance  and  the  tactics  of  the 
liquor  dealers.  He  succeeded  in  his  real  purpose,  for  the 
higher  court  found  against  him,  and  his  thirty-day  imprison¬ 
ment  was  regarded  as  a  martyr’s  fate  by  temperance  ad¬ 
vocates  throughout  the  country.  Retribution  came  seven 
years  later,  when  the  Washington  Temperance  Society  of 
Salem  was  organized  in  the  building  formerly  used  as  Deacon 
Stone’s  distillery.71 

to  do  the  work  of  the  distillery  in  highly  efficient  fashion.  On  each 
barrel  and  keg,  however,  they  secretly  inscribed  invisible  labels.  As 
soon  as  the  retailer  sold  the  first  draught  of  liquor  out  of  the  keg,  the 
label  become  plainly  visible  in  large  letters.  Some  of  the  inscriptions 
read  Consumption  Sold  Here,  Insanity  and  Murder,  For  Delirium 
Tremens  Inquire  Deacon  Giles’  Distillery.  So  frightened  were  re¬ 
tailers  and  customers  that  Deacon  Giles’  business  was  ruined. 

The  True  History  of  Deacon  Giles’  Distillery  (New  York,  1844)  ; 
New  York  Evangelist,  Feb.  21,  1835;  Pa.  Temp.  Rec.,  September,  1835, 
p.  51.  Another  famous  lawsuit  was  that  instituted  by  several  Albany 
brewers  against  E.  C.  Delavan.  On  February  12,  1835,  Delavan  pub¬ 
lished  an  article  in  the  Albany  Evening  Journal  in  which  he  charged 
breweries  in  the  city  with  using  polluted  water  for  malting  and  brewing 
purposes.  His  charges  were  so  well  supported  by  affidavits  that  the 
plaintiffs  were  not  able  to  collect  damages.  A  full  report  of  the 


THE  LITERATURE  OF  PROTEST  261 

The  most  virulent  attack  upon  the  temperance  propa¬ 
ganda  originated  in  York  County,  Pennsylvania.  Alex¬ 
ander  S.  Davis,  M'ho  had  retired  from  a  successful  business 
career  in  Philadelphia,  was  the  outstanding  leader  in  arous¬ 
ing  the  latent  opposition  in  that  section.  On  March  28, 
1842,  as  a  result  of  an  extensive  advertising  campaign,  a 
“public,  independent  anti-teetotal  abstinence”  meeting  was 
held  at  Hanover.  The  crowd  that  attended  represented 
York,  Adams  and  several  adjoining  counties  where  tem¬ 
perance  workers  had  always  found  a  hostile  sentiment. 
Addresses  were  delivered  in  English  and  German,  denouncing 
the  doctrine  of  total  abstinence  as  an  infringement  of  per¬ 
sonal  liberty  and  a  violation  of  Scriptural  injunctions.  The 
methods  of  the  temperance  reformers  were  branded  as  inimi¬ 
cal  to  political  and  religious  liberty  and  destructive  of 
republican  government.  No  effort  was  made  by  the  speakers 
to  justify  such  a  sweeping  indictment,  for  the  crowd  had  as¬ 
sembled  to  hear  unrestrained  denunciation.  At  the  conclu¬ 
sion  of  the  invectives  resolutions  were  adopted  to  express  def¬ 
initely  the  attitude  of  the  audience.  The  signers  agreed  that 
they  would  not  support  any  minister  or  teacher  who  preached 
or  taught  total  abstinence ;  that  they  would  not  vote  for  any 
person  for  public  office  who  favoured  the  temperance  cause. 
The  resolutions  were  to  be  published  in  at  least  three  news¬ 
papers  in  the  county.  Subsequently  Davis  wrote  and  dis¬ 
tributed  a  lengthy  account  of  the  proceedings.72  Although 
such  isolated  protests  indicated  a  growing  hostility  to  the 
reform,  they  represented  but  a  small  proportion  of  the 
opposition  finally  aroused  by  the  reformers’  attempts  to 
effect  the  legal  destruction  of  the  liquor  traffic. 

evidence  at  the  trial  was  printed  and  distributed  by  the  Albany 
Temperance  Society  in  1840.  See  A  Report  of  the  trial  of  the  cause 
of  John  Taylor  vs.  E.  C.  Delavan. 

72  Alexander  S.  Davis,  A  Loud  Call  to  the  Freemen  of  the  United 
States. 


CHAPTER  XI 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION 

Much  of  the  later  propaganda  of  the  temperance  move¬ 
ment  was  concerned  with  moral  suasion  and  legal  coercion, 
with  petitions  and  counter-petitions,  with  licence  laws  and 
amendatory  statutes ;  the  demand  for  restrictive  legislation 
was  constantly  gathering  force.  It  had  met  with  consider¬ 
able  opposition  during  the  decade  of  the  thirties,  when  few 
had  been  willing  to  consider  it  even  a  remotely  possible  solu¬ 
tion  of  the  liquor  question.  The  first  petitions' to  state  legis¬ 
latures,  for  example,  had  been  roundly  denounced  by  leaders 
within  the  temperance  ranks,  but  that  had  not  prevented  a 
determined  minority  from  pressing  the  question.  Memorial 
followed  memorial,  each  causing  dissension  among  the  reform 
clement  and  worrying  the  legislators  who  sought  to  appraise 
its  political  significance.  While  many  of  these  appeals  were 
laid  on  the  table,  or  otherwise  lost  in  the  ordinary  routine 
of  legislative  procedure,  not  all  were  so  conveniently  dis¬ 
posed  of.  In  some  states  an  attempt  was  made  to  satisfy  the 
petitioners  by  the  appointment  of  a  special  committee  to 
hear  evidence  with  regard  to  the  operation  of  existing  licence 
laws  and  to  report  whether  modifications  seemed  advisable. 
In  a  few  instances  the  committees  saw  fit  to  incorporate  their 
ideas  in  the  draft  of  a  law,  thus  presenting  the  issue 
squarely  to  the  legislature.  Such  was  the  origin  of  the 
“fifteen  gallon  law”  in  Massachusetts,  a  statute  which  served 
as  a  model  for  a  particular  type  of  legislation  in  other 
states. 


262 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION 


263 

A  state  convention  of  temperance  advocates,  held  in 
Boston  on  February  21,  1838,  adopted  resolutions  against 
“the  practise  of  licensing  men  to  traffic  in  intoxicating  liq¬ 
uors  to  be  sold  as  a  beverage,”  and  appointed  a  committee  to 
memorialize  the  legislature  on  the  subject.  The  committee, 
headed  by  such  earnest  workers  as  Dr.  Walter  Channing, 
Dr.  Ebenezer  Alden,  Rev.  John  Pierpont  and  Deacon  Moses 
Grant,  lost  no  time  in  framing  a  petition  which  asked  that 
all  laws  authorizing  the  sale  of  intoxicating  drinks  be  re¬ 
pealed  and  their  retail  sale  be  made  a  penal  offence.  The 
appeal,  with  1500  supporting  signatures,  reached  the  legis¬ 
lature  at  a  time  when  many  of  its  members  were  favourably 
inclined  toward  a  policy  of  restriction.  It  was  immediately 
referred  to  a  select  committee,  which  reported  a  bill  designed 
to  prohibit  the  sale  of  spirituous  liquors  in  small  quantities 
for  beverage  purposes.  The  minimum  quantity  to  be  sold 
by  licensed  dealers  was  fixed  at  twenty-eight  gallons,  except 
in  the  case  of  licensed  apothecaries  and  physicans.  With 
but  slight  modification  the  bill  was  passed  by  more  than  a 
two-thirds  vote  in  both  houses.  As  signed  by  Governor 
Edward  Everett  on  April  19,  it  forbade  the  sale  of  spirituous 
liquors,  except  for  medicinal  or  mechanical  purposes,  in 
less  quantity  than  fifteen  gallons,  “and  that  delivered  and 
carried  away  all  at  one  time.”  Sales  for  medicinal  and 
mechanical  purposes  might  be  made  b}-  licensed  apothecaries 
and  physicians,  and  the  wholesale  dealer  was  not  limited  by 
its  provisions.  In  its  effect,  therefore,  the  law  amounted  to 
prohibition  of  the  sale  of  distilled  liquors  in  taverns  and 
shops  for  beverage  purposes.  Though  it  did  not  place  wine 
and  malt  liquors  under  the  ban,  it  was  aimed  directly  at  the 
grog-shop  and  tippling-house.1 

The  reasoning  responsible  for  the  passage  of  the  “fifteen 

i  Laws  of  the  State  of  Massachusetts  (1838),  pp.  81-82;  Independent 
Messenger,  March  2,  1838,  April  20,  1838;  Report  of  the  American 
Temperance  Union  (1838),  pp.  32-33;  Clark,  op.  cit.,  pp.  39-40;  Marsh, 
op.  cit.,  pp.  64-65. 


264  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

gallon  law”  was  clearly  set  forth  in  the  special  committee’s 
report  to  the  legislature.  It  contained  in  well  documented 
form  a  comprehensive  and  specific  indictment  of  the  existing 
licence  system.  The  ineffectiveness  of  the  licence  laws,  the 
committee  held,  arose  from  the  fact  that  they  recognized  the 
use  of  spirituous  liquors  as  beneficial  and  necessary.  By 
their  provisions  they  furnished  legislative  sanction  for  the 
growth  of  the  retail  liquor  trade.  Out  of  this  situation  had 
developed  an  inconsistency  in  the  legislative  policy  of  the 
commonwealth.  While  one  set  of  statutes  was  designed  to 
protect  life,  health  and  reason  and  to  prevent  poverty,  vice 
and  crime,  another  set  was  as  carefully  framed  to  protect  a 
business  which  burdened  the  state  with  invalids,  lunatics, 
paupers  and  criminals.  This  inconsistency,  the  committee 
insisted,  was  detrimental  to  the  state’s  prosperity.  In¬ 
vestigations  during  1836  and  1837  had  revealed  the  fact 
that  more  than  three-quarters  of  the  pauperism  in  Massa¬ 
chusetts  was  caused  by  intemperance,  that  the  liquor  traffic 
sent  its  annual  quota  of  victims  to  the  State  Lunatic  Asylum 
at  Worcester,  and  that  the  prisons  were  filled  with  men  whose 
crimes  were  traceable  to  strong  drink.  In  the  face  of  such 
incontrovertible  evidence  it  seemed  economically  unwise  to 
retain  a  system  of  so-called  regulation,  whereby  the  sale  of 
spirituous  liquors  was  really  encouraged.2  As  to  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  enforcing  the  proposed  measure  the  committee 
entertained  some  doubts,  but  it  saw  no  reason  for  refusing 
to  enact  a  law  because  of  probable  difficulties  in  enforce¬ 
ment. 

Opponents  of  the  new  statute  began  a  campaign  for  its 
repeal  before  it  had  gone  into  operation.  The  centre  of 
activity  was  Boston,  for  few  of  the  city’s  representatives  had 
favoured  the  bill  when  it  was  before  the  legislature.  Reali¬ 
zing  that  the  rural  communities  were  responsible  for  the  pas¬ 
sage  of  the  act,  Boston  liquor  dealers  and  their  friends  issued 
3  Report  of  Linus  Child  to  the  Legislature  of  1838. 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION  265 

an  appeal  to  voters  in  the  country  districts  trying  to  per¬ 
suade  them  that  under  the  new  system  they  would  lose  a  good 
market  for  their  grain.  The  friends  of  temperance  issued 
a  reply  in  which  they  emphasized  the  cost  of  intemperance 
to  the  tax-payer.3  As  the  autumn  elections  for  the  legisla¬ 
ture  drew  near,  the  political  situation  seemed  favourable  to 
the  advocates  of  repeal.  Though  the  act  had  been  sup¬ 
ported  by  both  Whigs  and  Democrats,  the  latter  party, 
making  a  strong  bid  for  the  governorship,  believed  that  it 
could  capitalize  popular  dissatisfaction  in  Boston  and  vicin¬ 
ity  by  favouring  a  return  to  the  old  licence  system.  The 
Whigs  were  badly  divided  over  the  question,  and  the  logic 
of  the  situation  seemed  to  indicate  that  the  Van  Buren  men 
could  take  advantage  of  their  opponents’  dissensions. 
During  the  campaign  opponents  of  the  law  made  much  of  the 
fact  that  it  had  apparently  been  framed  to  benefit  the  rich. 
The  fifteen  gallon  minimum  enabled  the  wealthy  citizen  to 
purchase  his  stocks  of  liquor  and  store  them,  but  it  effec¬ 
tually  prevented  the  poor  man  from  securing  the  smaller 
quantities  which  he  could  afford.  Supporters  of  the  law 
countered  this  attack  by  charging  the  Boston  aristocracy 
with  having  originated  the  idea  that  the  law  oppressed  the 
poor.  Why,  they  asked,  had  the  “monied  aristocracy” 
suddenly  become  so  interested  in  their  less  fortunate  breth¬ 
ren?  This  defence  of  the  poor  man  sounded  suspiciously 
like  an  invention  of  the  rum-sellers.  The  law  had  not  been 
passed  for  the  benefit  of  the  wealthy.  It  had  been  enacted 
without  their  aid  and  it  would  have  to  be  sustained  in  the 
same  manner.4 

3  A  Reply  to  the  Report  of  the  Committee  of  those  opposed  to  the 
License  Law;  Address  by  the  Hampshire  Convention  of  the  Friends 
of  the  License  Law. 

*  Hampshire  Gazette  (Northampton),  April  18,  Nov.  7,  1838;  Peter 
Parley,  Five  Letters  to  My  Neighbor  Smith;  Moses  Williams,  The 
Cracked  Jug,  or  Five  Answers  to  My  Neighbor  Parley’s  Five  Letters ; 


266  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

The  November  election  resulted  in  the  re-election  of 
Governor  Everett,  who  was  opposed  to  an  immediate  repeal 
of  the  law.  The  liberal  Democrats  and  Whigs,  in  favour  of 
a  return  to  the  old  licensing  system,  were  not  able  to  control 
the  legislature.  Pressure  was  soon  brought  to  bear  upon  the 
hesitant  ones,  however,  and  an  investigation  of  the  law  was 
ordered.  Harrison  Gray  Otis,  who  well  represented  the  old 
“quality”  of  Boston,  drafted  a  legal  argument  against  it, 
which  was  signed  by  hundreds  of  citizens.  The  public  hear¬ 
ings  before  the  select  committee  were  used  by  both  groups  in 
an  attempt  to  influence  the  legislature.  Mayor  Samuel  A. 
Eliot  of  Boston,  Benjamin  F.  Hallett  and  Franklin  Dexter 
argued  the  case  against  restriction,  while  Peleg  Sprague 
appeared  as  defender  of  the  law.5  Dexter  summed  up  the 
contentions  of  his  colleagues.  He  argued  that  the  statute 
in  question  injured  a  good  moral  cause  by  arousing  the 
antagonism  of  those  who  were  anxious  to  effect  the  reform 
by  moral  suasion.  It  amounted  to  a  prohibition  of  the  retail 
sale  of  spirituous  liquors  and  as  such  it  was  an  unwarranted 
violation  of  property  rights.  Its  infringement  of  personal 
liberty  was  serious,  but  even  more  so  was  its  conflict  with 
federal  statutes  which  granted  the  right  to  import  liquor. 
Furthermore,  the  law  was  inexpedient,  since  it  was  not  based 
on  public  sentiment.  It  could  not  be  enforced.  The  in¬ 
evitable  reaction,  therefore,  would  be  detrimental  to  the  very 
cause  which  the  law  sought  to  promote.6 

Essex  Register  quoted  in  Journal,  July,  1838,  p.  101;  Clark,  op.  cit., 
p.  41. 

s  The  counsel  who  appeared  against  the  law  were  all  representative 
of  that  wing  of  the  temperance  movement  which  opposed  restrictive 
legislation.  Hallett  had  distinguished  himself  as  a  temperance  advocate 
when  he  was  editor  of  the  Boston  Dailg  Advertiser  from  1827  to  1831. 
Dexter  was  a  son  of  Samuel  Dexter,  first  president  of  the  Massa¬ 
chusetts  Temperance  Society.  Journal,  March,  1839,  pp.  31—36. 

6  Franklin  Dexter,  Investigation  of  the  Fifteen  Gallon  Law.  See  also 
Letters  to  Harrison  Gray  Otis,  pp.  2-11;  Journal,  May,  1838,  p.  72; 
Clark,  op.  cit.,  p.  41. 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION  267 

For  the  supporters  of  restriction  Peleg  Sprague  presented 
a  carefully  drawn  answer  to  these  arguments.  He  main¬ 
tained  that  the  state’s  action  was  in  conformity  with  a  judi¬ 
cious  exercise  of  its  police  power.  The  statute  under  dis¬ 
cussion  was  of  a  sort  with  those  restraining  the  sale  of 
obscene  books  and  pictures,  or  suppressing  gambling,  lewd¬ 
ness  and  drunkenness.  It  was  not  in  conflict  with  the  con¬ 
stitutional  provision  granting  Congress  pow’er  to  regulate 
interstate  and  foreign  commerce,  for  it  dealt  solely  with 
intra-state  commerce.  This  distinction  had  been  upheld  by 
the  United  States  Supreme  Court  in  the  famous  cases  of 
Gibbons  v.  Ogden  and  Brown  v.  Maryland.  Furthermore, 
Sprague  argued,  Congress  itself  had  prohibited  the  importa¬ 
tion  of  distilled  spirits  in  any  quantity  less  than  fifteen 
gallons.  Massachusetts’  legislation  was,  therefore,  in  har¬ 
mony  with  federal  regulation  of  foreign  commerce.  As  for 
the  contention  that  the  “fifteen  gallon  law”  discriminated 
between  rich  and  poor,  it  was  manifestly  absurd.  Anyone, 
not  on  the  verge  of  pauperism,  could  raise  five  or  six  dollars 
to  purchase  the  minimum  quantity.  The  real  ground  for 
the  apprehension  felt  by  liquor  dealers  was  that  the  poor 
man  would  not,  rather  than  that  he  could  not  purchase  so 
freely  as  formerty.  Finally,  Sprague  presented  evidence  to 
show  that  in  those  counties,  where  commissioners  had  refused 
to  issue  licences  under  the  old  law,  a  significant  decrease  had 
occurred  in  pauperism  and  crime,  which  residents  of  the 
counties  attributed  to  a  decline  in  intemperance.  Such 
correlations  would  be  noticeable  throughout  the  state  under 
the  operation  of  the  new  law.7 

The  report  of  the  special  committee  to  the  legislature 
sustained  Sprague’s  arguments  and  the  legislature  voted 

t  Argument  of  Peleg  Sprague  Before  the  Joint  Committee  of  the 
Legislature.  For  confirmation  of  Sprague’s  argument  in  regard  to 
pauperism  in  no-licence  counties  see  Salem  Register  quoted  in  Journal, 
May,  1838,  p.  86, 


268  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

against  repeal.  The  victory  of  the  anti-licence  group  how¬ 
ever,  had  not  settled  the  question  of  restrictive  legislation. 
Supporters  of  a  liberal  licence  policy  continued  their  agita¬ 
tion,  making  considerable  impression  by  urging  that  the  law 
was  a  blunder  since  it  could  not  be  enforced.  Public  opinion, 
they  said,  approved  moral  suasion  as  a  method  of  securing 
reforms,  but  it  had  not  yet  been  educated  to  the  point  of 
accepting  legislative  coercion  as  a  means  of  correcting  man¬ 
ners  and  morals.  Consequently,  any  attempt  to  combat 
intemperance  by  imposing  legal  restrictions  was  too  far  in 
advance  of  public  sentiment  to  be  practicable.  Conventions 
of  tavern-keepers  adopted  resolutions  condemning  a  law 
which  seriously  interfered  with  the  business  of  keeping  a 
public  house.  A  group  of  “liberal”  Whig  members  of  the 
legislature  met  at  the  State  House  on  April  8  and  appointed 
a  committee  of  correspondence  to  arouse  and  organize 
opinion  favourable  to  repeal.  To  counteract  such  propa¬ 
ganda  a  campaign  of  law  enforcement  was  initiated  by 
supporters  of  the  statute.  Such  papers  as  the  Hampshire 
Gazette  and  the  Massachusetts  Spy  urged  all  citizens  to 
abide  by  the  decision  of  the  majority  whatever  their  per¬ 
sonal  opinions  on  the  subject.  The  Springfield  Republican 
rejoiced  that  the  “liberals”  were  able  to  make  little  headway 
and  that  the  law  would  be  obeyed.  The  mayors  of  Salem 
and  Lowell  served  notice  that  they  would  punish  severely 
all  violations  of  the  law.  In  Boston  committees  were  or¬ 
ganized  in  each  ward  to  co-operate  with  the  police  and  the 
magistrates.8 

On  May  30,  1839,  the  Massachusetts  Temperance  Society, 
which  was  suspected  of  hostility  to  prohibitory  measures, 
adopted  a  resolution  stating  that  the  law  of  1838  deserved 
the  support  of  every  citizen  who  had  the  interests  of  the 

8  See  the  extracts  from  Massachusetts  papers  in  Journal,  May, 
1839,  p.  75;  Springfield  Republican,  June  8,  July  6,  1839;  Hingham 
Patriot f  April,  1839, 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION  269 

commonwealth  at  heart.  Hubbard  Winslow,  who  was  Ly¬ 
man  Beecher’s  successor  in  the  Bowdoin  Street  Church, 
Boston,  voiced  the  sentiment  of  most  of  the  temperance 
people,  when  he  insisted  that  the  issue  was  no  longer  the 
desirability  of  restrictive  measures,  but  the  enforcement  of 
existing  statutes.  He  answered  the  argument  that  the 
“fifteen  gallon  law”  could  not  be  enforced  by  asserting  that 
the  principle  which  allows  one  law  to  be  trampled  upon  will 
allow  every  law  to  be  trampled  upon.  “If  tbis  spirit  of  in¬ 
subordination,”  he  warned  the  liquor  dealers  and  their 
friends,  “is  allowed  to  go  on  in  our  country,  the  time  will 
come  when  no  law  will  be  sacred.”  9 

The  refusal  of  liquor  dealers  in  some  sections  to  close  their 
grog-shops  and  tippling-houses  aroused  extraordinary  public 
interest  in  the  matter  of  prosecutions.10  In  Boston  the 
arrest  of  an  inn-keeper,  who  refused  to  pay  his  fine  or  go  to 
jail,  almost  resulted  in  a  riot.  Several  thousand  citizens 
assembled  with  the  intention  of  preventing  the  imprisonment 
of  the  liquor  dealer,  but  the  authorities  were  able  to  avoid 
a  clash  with  the  mob  by  collecting  the  fine.11  From  almost 
every  town  came  word  of  indictments,  trials,  convictions, 
fines  and  appeals.  Some  retailers  paid  their  fines  and  con¬ 
tinued  in  business,  hoping  that  the  second  prosecution  would 
be  long  deferred.  Others  agreed  to  abandon  the  sale  of 
spirituous  liquors.  Many  appealed  their  cases,  when  fines 
were  imposed  by  the  lower  courts.  In  a  few  instances  the 
police  courts  sentenced  those  found  guilty  of  maintaining 
common  tippling-houses  to  serve  a  short  term  in  the  house  of 
correction.12 

During  the  late  summer  and  early  autumn  both  the  licence 
and  anti-licence  groups  campaigned  vigorously  to  control 

o  Documents  and  Records  of  the  Massachusetts  Temperance  Society, 
p.  80;  Hubbard  Winslow,  The  Importance  of  Sustaining  the  Law, 

10  Conn.  Courant,  June  25,  1839. 

11  Journal,  July,  1839,  p.  105. 

12  Ibid.,  September,  1839,  p.  139. 


270  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

the  new  legislature.  Opponents  of  the  existing  law  estab¬ 
lished  a  paper  called  The  Liberal,  while  the  opposite  party 
issued  a  weekly,  Facts  for  the  People,  until  after  the  election. 
To  offset  the  charge  that  the  question  was  a  political  one, 
Whig  supporters  of  the  “fifteen  gallon  law”  persuaded 
Robert  Rantoul,  Jr.,  one  of  the  most  prominent  Democratic 
politicians  in  the  state,  to  undertake  a  speaking  tour  in  be¬ 
half  of  law  enforcement.13  Wherever  he  spoke,  he  coun¬ 
selled  the  friends  of  temperance  to  send  representatives  to 
the  legislature  who  would  make  no  concession  to  the  liquor  in¬ 
terests.  Fie  also  assured  his  hearers  that  the  licence 
question  cut  across  party  lines  and  that  Democrats  and 
Whigs  did  not  represent  opposite  views  on  the  subject.  On 
October  23,  a  temperance  convention  in  Middlesex  County 
reiterated  these  statements,  warning  voters  not  to  be  misled 
by  party  labels,  but  to  investigate  the  candidate’s  record. 
“The  time  has  arrived,”  said  the  committee,  “when  all  the 
friends  of  our  republican  institutions,  and  of  good  order, 
are  signally  called  upon  to  maintain  their  principles  by 
vigorous  action.  Every  means  that  interest  and  art  can 
devise,  to  defeat  the  operation  of  the  People’s  law,  has  been 
put  in  requisition,  and  great  efforts  will  be  made  throughout 
the  Commonwealth,  to  elect  men  to  the  Massachusetts  Senate, 
as  well  as  to  the  House  of  Representatives,  who  will  repeal 
the  law  which  protects  us  from  the  evils  of  dram-shops,  and 
give  the  triumph  to  the  spirit  of  misrule  and  sordid  interest. 
Will  not  the  friends  of  the  law  be  awake  to  the  sense  of  their 
danger  and  their  duty  at  this  important  crisis?”  14 

The  temperance  forces  were  much  embarrassed  by  the 
gubernatorial  campaign.  It  was  rumoured  that  a  vote  for 
Marcus  Morton,  the  Democratic  candidate,  was  a  vote  for 
repeal,  yet  Morton  had  long  been  known  as  a  temperance 
advocate,  having  served  as  the  first  president  of  the  American 

i %  Journal,  October,  1839,  p.  149. 

I*  Journal,  November,  1839,  p.  172, 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION  271 

Temperance  Society.  His  position  in  regard  to  the  “fifteen 
gallon  law,”  however,  had  never  been  clearly  stated,  whereas 
Governor  Everett  was  on  record  in  opposition  to  the  repeal 
of  the  statute.  Democratic  workers  were  urging  all  “lib¬ 
erals”  to  support  Morton,  if  they  desired  a  change  in  the 
liquor  laws.  The  result  of  the  election  was  in  doubt  for 
some  time  owing  to  the  closeness  of  the  vote,  but  it  was 
finally  decided  that  Everett  had  lost  the  governship  by 
one  vote.  In  the  legislature  the  friends  of  law  enforcement 
appeared  to  have  suffered  important  reverses.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  the  Boston  Mercantile  Journal  felt  that  the  liquor  law 
would  not  be  repealed  and  doubted  whether  the  new  governor 
would  approve  any  change  in  policy.  The  Journal  of  the 
American  Temperance  Union  maintained  that  the  defeat  of 
Governor  Everett  had  no  bearing  on  the  licence  question 
whatever.  Was  not  Morton  a  temperance  man?  15  Such 
hopes  were  soon  dispelled  by  the  governor,  for  in  his  first 
message  to  the  legislature  he  demonstrated  that  he  was  not 
the  kind  of  temperance  advocate  who  believed  in  legal  coer¬ 
cion.  He  characterized  the  act  of  1838  as  a  “sumptuary 
regulation”  which  interfered  unnecessarily  with  “private 
business”  and  consequently  violated  the  property  rights  of 
persons  engaged  in  a  particular  form  of  commercial  enter¬ 
prise.  He,  therefore,  recommended  that  the  legislature  re¬ 
peal  the  law  and  revert  to  the  licence  system  of  1837.  The 
legislature  was  not  slow  to  act  on  the  governor’s  recom¬ 
mendation  and  on  February  9,  1840,  the  “fifteen  gallon  law” 
was  repealed.16 

The  response  of  the  temperance  forces  was  voiced  at  a 
state  convention  held  in  Marlboro  Chapel,  Boston,  on  Feb¬ 
ruary  12,  with  more  than  1400  delegates  in  attendance. 

is  Boston  Mercantile  Journal,  November  25,  1839.  Cited  in  Journal, 
January,  1840,  p.  9. 

is  Journal ,  March,  1840,  p.  38.  This  return  to  the  law  of  1837  meant 
that  county  commissioners  could  at  their  discretion  refuse  to  grant 
any  liquor  licences. 


272  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

Samuel  Hoar  of  Concord  presided  over  the  sessions  and 
sounded  the  keynote.17  The  repeal  of  the  law  of  1838,  he 
said,  had  thrown  open  the  floodgates  to  drunkenness.  In 
such  a  crisis  the  future  policy  of  the  temperance  advocates  in 
the  state  was  a  matter  of  grave  concern.  He  himself  fa¬ 
voured  explicit  pronouncements  on  the  governor’s  message 
and  the  action  of  the  legislature.  A  special  committee  was 
appointed  by  the  chair  to  draft  appropriate  resolutions.  It 
reported  a  lengthy  document  which  approved  the  principle 
of  total  abstinence,  condemned  the  old  system  of  liquor 
licences,  criticized  the  governor  and  legislature  and  de¬ 
manded  more  stringent  legislation.  The  resolution  referring 
to  political  action  in  the  future  aroused  a  storm  of  protest. 
It  was  finally  adopted  in  the  following  form : 

Resolved,  that  until  the  laws  of  this  state,  concerning  the  sale 
of  intoxicating  liquors,  are  fully  established  upon  the  basis  of 
prohibition  and  sustained  by  a  correct  general  sentiment,  like 
the  other  criminal  and  penal  laws  of  the  Commonwealth,  it  is,  in 
our  opinion,  the  duty  of  the  temperance  men,  to  vote  only  for 
those  men  as  candidates  for  legislative  and  executive  offices,  who 
are  known  and  inflexible  friends  of  such  a  course  of  legislation. 

The  vote  on  this  question  proved  that  more  than  sixty  were 
opposed  to  its  adoption,  among  them  Samuel  Hoar  of 
Concord  and  Emory  Washburn  of  Worcester,  two  of  the 
leading  lawyers  in  the  state.  The  dissenters  insisted  that 
the  suggested  course  could  mean  only  one  thing,  a  third 
political  party.  The  majority,  however,  maintained  that 
the  resolution  was  designed  merely  to  give  a  preference  to 
temperance  men  over  all  others  in  their  own  party.18  But 
the  difference  of  opinion  was  not  sufficient  to  prevent  the 

it  Samuel  Hoar  was  the  father  of  Judge  E.  R.  Hoar  and  Senator 
George  F.  Hoar. 

is  Clark,  op.  cit.,  pp.  232-234;  Journal,  March,  1840,  pp.  38-39; 
P.  T.  D.,  Ill,  193-4;  Manufacturers  and  Farmers  Journal ,  Feb.  24,  1840, 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION  273 

convention  from  serving  notice  that  the  fight  against  licence 
laws  was  not  at  an  end.19 

In  the  meantime  temperance  workers  had  been  politically 
active  beyond  the  confines  of  Massachusetts.  We  have 
already  noticed  the  efforts  of  Flournoy  in  Georgia  to  secure 
a  repeal  of  the  licence  laws,  a  movement  which  resulted  so 
disastrously  for  the  reformers.20  For  two  decades  after 
this  failure  Georgia  made  no  change  in  the  system  of  regu¬ 
lation,  the  state  legislature  continuing  to  confer  upon 
authorities  in  the  incorporated  municipalities  or  the  coun¬ 
ties  the  right  to  grant  licences  and  punish  unlicensed 
dealers.21  But  several  states  attempted  to  follow  Massa¬ 
chusetts’  policy  of  restricting  the  retail  sale  of  spirituous 
liquors.22  Numerous  petitions  to  the  legislature  of  Miss¬ 
issippi  finally  resulted  in  a  modification  of  the  existing 
statutes  in  1839,  when  Henry  S.  Foote  introduced  a  bill 
prohibiting  the  sale  of  vinous  or  spirituous  liquors  in  less 
quantity  than  one  gallon.  Inn-keepers  and  taverners  were 

is  During  the  campaign  against  the  “fifteen  gallon  law”  the  dismissal 
of  Rev.  John  Pierpont  from  the  First  Unitarian  Church  caused 
considerable  excitement  in  Boston.  It  was  charged  that  the  liquor 
dealers  and  their  friends  had  instigated  the  action  because  of  the 
clergyman's  activity  in  temperance  reform.  A  storm  of  protest  in 
Boston  and  New  York  newspapers  gave  the  matter  much  publicity  and 
within  a  few  weeks  the  congregation  voted  to  reinstate  Pierpont  and 
give  him  a  free  pulpit.  See  extracts  from  the  Boston  'Mercantile 
Journal,  New  York  Commercial  and  The  New  Yorker  in  Journal, 
November,  1839,  p.  169  December,  p.  189;  Portland  Transcript,  April 
25,  1840. 

20  Supra,  p.  174. 

21  Scomp,  op.  cit.,  pp.  452-458. 

22  The  legislature  of  Tennessee  had  taken  an  important  step  toward 
prohibitory  legislation  in  1838  by  repealing  all  laws  licensing  the  sale 
of  spirituous  liquors  in  taverns  and  stores.  Such  sale  was  made  a 
misdemeanor  and  the  courts  were  authorized  to  impose  fines  at  their 
discretion;  all  fines  and  forfeitures  to  be  appropriated  to  the  use  of 
the  common  schools.  The  act  remained  in  force  until  1846,  when  a 
system  of  high  licences  was  substituted.  Acts  of  the  State  of  Tennessee 
(1837-1838),  pp.  186-187,  (1845-1846),  pp.  154-158;  Journal,  March, 
1838,  p.  40. 


274  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

forbidden  to  sell  to  guests  except  in  quantities  above  the 
minimum.  The  bill  was  passed  by  the  legislature  with  little 
difficulty  and  received  the  signature  of  Governor  McNutt  in 
February,  1839. 23  It  seems  to  have  been  reasonably  well 
enforced  during  the  three  years  that  it  was  in  effect,  for 
the  Alabama  state  temperance  convention  in  1841  petitioned 
the  legislature  for  a  law  similar  to  the  Mississippi  “gallon 
law.”  24 

The  anti-licence  people  in  South  Carolina  staged  an  ex¬ 
tensive  campaign  for  repeal  of  the  liquor  laws  in  1839. 
Several  parish  societies  sent  resolutions  to  the  legislature 
recommending  that  the  sale  of  spirituous  liquors  in  any 
quantity  less  than  twenty  gallons  be  prohibited.  Judge 
John  B.  O’Neale,  president  of  the  state  temperance  society, 
and  Albert  Rhett,  a  member  of  the  legislature,  were  selected 
to  argue  the  cause  of  restriction  before  a  select  legislative 
committee.  Although  the  proposed  measure  had  the  active 
support  of  such  a  prominent  politician  as  Robert  Barnwell 
Rhett  and  was  championed  in  the  columns  of  the  Charleston 
Courier  and  the  South  Carolinian,  the  committee  reported 
against  modifying  the  existing  law.  Judge  O’Neale  attri¬ 
buted  this  failure  to  the  attitude  of  the  state  temperance 
society  and  its  official  organ,  the  South  Carolina  Temperance 
Advocate.  Neither  the  executive  committee  of  the  Society, 
nor  the  editors  of  the  periodical  were  enthusiastic  over  re¬ 
strictive  legislation,  and  their  lukewarm  support  of  O’Neale 
was  partially  responsible  for  the  defeat  of  the  anti-licence 
group  before  the  committee.25 

23  Laws  of  the  State  of  Mississippi  (1839),  pp.  26-28;  Journal,  March, 
1839,  p.  38.  The  law  was  repealed  on  February  22,  1842,  and  a  system 
of  high  licence  fees  was  adopted.  Laws  of  the  State  of  Mississippi 
(1842),  pp.  110-114. 

2* Journal,  May,  1839,  p.  69;  Mobile  Commercial  Register,  May 
19,  1841. 

25  Charleston  Courier,  September  10,  1839;  Journal,  September,  1839, 
p.  141,  October,  p.  156,  November,  p.  173,  February,  1840,  pp. 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION  275 

The  legislatures  of  Connecticut,  Rhode  Island  and  Illinois, 
afraid  to  ignore  the  temperance  petitions  and  unwilling  to 
enact  restrictive  legislation,  passed  the  responsibility  to  the 
local  governments.  The  situation  in  Connecticut  was  par¬ 
ticularly  interesting  because  of  the  well  organized  opposition 
of  those  engaged  in  the  liquor  traffic.  Grocers,  tavern- 
keepers  and  other  retailers  of  intoxicants  in  New  Haven 
announced  their  intention  of  fighting  for  their  rights.  At 
an  organization  meeting  in  1838  they  charged  the  temper¬ 
ance  societies  with  maintaining  paid  informers  to  detect 
violations  of  the  licence  laws  and  with  financing  the  prosecu¬ 
tion  of  those  against  whom  information  was  obtained.  They 
further  denounced  the  reform  movement  as  a  conspiracy  to 
procure  political  power  for  purposes  of  oppression.  For 
their  own  part,  they  had  endured  in  silence  long  enough. 
It  was  now  time  to  take  action  against  the  hypocrisy  of  their 
persecutors.  They  had  a  fund  of  three  thousand  dollars 
with  which  to  begin  a  legal  assault  on  the  constitutionality 
of  any  law  restricting  their  business  interests.  Every  per¬ 
son  opposed  to  intolerance  and  persecution,  every  person  to 
whom  political  and  personal  liberty  vras  dear,  was  invited 
to  join  them.26  But  in  spite  of  this  threat  from  New  Haven 
the  Connecticut  legislature  in  May,  1839,  passed  a  law 
making  it  a  penal  offence  for  any  person  to  sell  wines  and 
spirituous  liquors  without  a  licence  granted  by  a  majority 
vote  of  the  town  meeting.27 

The  principle  of  local  option  was  gaining  popularity 
rapidly.  Even  before  Connecticut’s  action  Rhode  Island  in 

35-36.  In  1839  Ohio  limited  sales  of  spirituous  liquors  to  tavern  bars. 
Acts  of  a  General  Nature  of  the  State  of  Ohio  (1839). 

20  Leonard  Bacon,  Discourse  on  the  Traffic,  pp.  51-54. 

2T  Public  Acts  of  Connecticut  (1839),  pp.  55-56;  P.  T.  D.,  Report  for 
1839,  p.  21.  This  act  was  repealed  in  1842  in  order  to  permit  the 
licensing  of  taverns  to  sell  in  small  quantities.  In  1845  public  in¬ 
vestigators  were  appointed  to  report  violations  of  the  law.  Public 
Acts  of  Connecticut  (1842),  p.  40,  (1846),  pp.  46-48. 


276  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

January,  1839,  had  conferred  upon  the  freemen  in  the 
respective  towns  the  right  to  decide  by  ballot  whether  any 
liquor  licences  should  be  issued.  The  selectmen  and  aider- 
men  were  bound  to  abide  bv  the  result  of  the  vote.28  During 
the  same  year  Illinois  limited  the  jurisdiction  of  the  county 
courts  over  licences.  An  act  of  March  2,  1839,  provided 
that  no  licences  should  be  issued  in  the  county,  if  a  majority 
of  the  legal  voters  so  petitioned  the  court.  This  prohibi¬ 
tion  was  to  remain  in  effect  until  a  majority  of  the  voters 
petitioned  for  a  re-issuance  of  licences.29  In  both  states 
local  option  proved  disappointing  to  the  temperance  sup¬ 
porters.  It  was  extremely  difficult  to  enforce  the  law  because 
of  the  proximity  of  licence  territory  to  the  no-licence 
towns.30  Besides,  few  of  the  communities  pursued  either 
policy  long  enough  to  allow  an  intelligent  comparison  of 
effects.  One  year  a  town  would  reject  liquor  licences  and  the 
next  it  might  authorize  the  authorities  to  issue  as  many  as 
seemed  desirable.  As  a  result  the  temperance  people  came 
to  regard  local  option  as  of  doubtful  value  to  the  cause. 
The  American  Temperance  Union  urged  state  and  local 
societies  to  campaign  for  restrictive  laws  which  would 
operate  uniformly  throughout  the  state.31 

Still,  the  most  notable  victories  continued  to  be  won  by 
popular  vote  under  local  option  laws  rather  than  by  state 
action.  During  the  decade  of  the  forties  the  legislature  of 
Pennsylvania  granted  to  particular  counties  the  right  to 
ballot  on  the  licence  question.  By  1847  eighteen  counties 

28  Acts  of  the  State  of  Rhode  Island  (1838-1839),  pp.  75-78. 

29  Laws  of  Illinois  (1838-1839),  pp.  71-72. 

so  Difficulties  of  enforcing  the  local  option  law  in  Rhode  Island 
led  to  the  passage  of  an  act  in  1846  which  provided  for  public  in¬ 
formers  in  each  town.  Acts  of  the  State  of  Rhode  Island  (1846), 
p.  63;  Edward  Peterson,  The  Bible  Temperance  Review,  pp.  21-25. 

si  For  example,  Providence  in  1840  and  1841  granted  no  licences, 
but  in  1842  at  least  sixty-three  were  permitted  to  sell  ardent  spirits  in 
small  quantities.  Providence  Daily  Journal,  April  25,  1842.  Also  see 
Journal,  November,  1839,  p.  169;  P.  T.  D.,  II,  274. 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION  277 

enjoyed  this  privilege  and  five  had  already  forbidden  the 
sale  of  spirituous  liquors  within  their  borders.32  In  Rhode 
Island  in  1845  every  town  but  three  voted  no-licence,  while 
more  than  three-fourths  of  the  towns  in  Connecticut  did 
likewise.  The  following  year  a  popular  referendum  in  Ver¬ 
mont  resulted  in  the  prohibition  of  the  sale  of  ardent  spirits 
by  retailers.  Local  option  laws  in  Wisconsin  and  Michigan 
enabled  about  half  of  the  towns  to  bar  grog-shops  and 
tippling-houses.  In  Iowa  every  county  except  Keokuk 
voted  no-licence  in  1847.  Although  many  of  these  victories 
were  temporary,  it  was  evident,  said  the  reformers,  that 
sentiment  in  favour  of  restrictive  legislation  was  rapidly 
increasing.33 

The  conflict  in  New  York  state  was  of  special  interest  to 
temperance  workers  in  all  parts  of  the  country,  not  only 
because  of  the  importance  of  the  state,  but  also  because  of  its 
pre-eminent  position  in  the  reform  movement  during  the 
early  years.  New  York  had  long  ranked  first  in  the  number 
of  societies,  in  total  membership,  in  contributions  and  in  the 
distribution  of  propaganda.  Would  the  state  rank  as  high 
in  the  fight  for  prohibitory  legislation?  During  the  spring 
of  1845  the  constant  stream  of  petitions  to  the  legislature 
and  the  work  of  a  strong  temperance  lobby  at  Albany  finally 
forced  the  select  committee  to  report  a  bill  designed  to 
amend  the  existing  excise  system.  The  proposed  measure 
provided  that  the  electors  in  the  several  towns  and  cities 
were  to  determine  at  a  special  election  whether  licences  to  sell 

32  See  Laws  of  Pennsylvania  (1845),  pp.  327-328,  (1846),  pp.  383-384; 
(1847),  p.  53;  P.  T.  D.,  Report  for  18//7,  p.  5. 

33  Laws  of  Vermont  (1846),  pp.  18-21;  Laws  of  the  Territory  of 
Wisconsin  (1847),  pp.  218-220;  P.  T.  D.,  Report  for  1847,  pp.  4-6; 
Silas  Farmer,  History  of  Detroit  and  Wayne  County;  Journal,  April, 
1848,  p.  61.  In  1847  the  Supreme  Court  decided  the  famous  Licence 
Cases  in  favour  of  state  regulation.  The  power  of  the  state  to 
suppress  as  well  as  license  the  sale  of  liquors  was  upheld  in  Thurlow  v. 
Massachusetts,  Fletcher  v.  Rhode  Island  and  Pierce  v.  New  Hampshire. 
6  Howard  504-683. 


278  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

intoxicating  liquors  should  be  granted.  If  the  result  of 
the  balloting  in  any  town  or  city  was  in  favour  of  no-licence, 
the  board  of  excise  was  bound  by  the  decision  to  refuse  to 
grant  any  permit  for  the  sale  of  intoxicants.  This  decision 
was  to  stand  until  one-fourth  of  the  number  that  voted  at 
the  special  election  should  petition,  in  writing,  for  another 
vote  on  the  question. 

This  bill  was  approved  by  the  assembly  without  a  re¬ 
corded  vote,  but  in  the  senate  considerable  opposition  de¬ 
veloped.  In  order  to  carry  any  kind  of  a  local  option 
measure  it  was  necessary  to  exclude  New  York  County  from 
the  provisions  of  the  act.  A  compromise  was  finally  reached 
by  granting  to  the  excise  commissioners  in  New  York  County 
the  power  to  issue  licences  at  increased  fees  and  by  increasing 
the  penalties  for  Sunday  sales  in  New  York  City.  In  this 
form  the  bill  passed  the  legislature  and  received  Governor 
Wright’s  signature  on  May  14. 34  The  date  for  the  special 
election  was  fixed  as  the  first  Tuesday  before  the  first  Mon¬ 
day  in  May,  1846.  This  allowed  the  anti-licence  forces  one 
year  in  which  to  campaign  for  their  principles.  The  leaders 
admitted  that  they  needed  every  minute  of  the  time.  Organi¬ 
zation  work  began  immediately.  On  April  25  at  the  call 
of  the  executive  committee  of  the  New  York  State  Temper¬ 
ance  Society  a  convention  was  held  at  Albany  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  discussing  the  features  of  the  proposed  excise  law. 
Some  were  inclined  to  think  that  it  would  amount  to  little, 
since  New  York  City  was  not  included  within  its  provisions. 
A  few  were  opposed  to  any  sort  of  legislation  against  the 
liquor  traffic,  but  the  majority  were  convinced  that  an 
energetic  campaign  should  be  undertaken  in  every  town  and 
city  to  secure  a  no-licence  vote.  Horace  Greeley,  Edward 

3 *  Journal  of  the  Assembly  of  the  State  of  New  York,  68th  session, 
514,  1392;  69th  session,  420;  Journal,  May,  1845,  p.  74,  June,  1845,  p.  88. 
The  New  York  Tribune  charged  that  the  “Loco-foeos”  were  responsible 
for  the  exclusion  of  New  York  from  the  provisions  of  the  bill.  May 
15,  1845. 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION  279 

C.  Delavan  and  Rev.  John  Marsh,  as  the  committee  on  resolu¬ 
tions,  recommended  that  a  union  of  the  temperance  organiza¬ 
tions  be  effected  in  each  community  for  the  purpose  of  dis¬ 
cussing  the  excise  law  and  distributing  suitable  literature  in 
regard  to  it.  Furthermore,  each  county  was  urged  to  hold  a 
convention  before  the  meeting  of  the  state  convention  in 
October.35 

One  of  the  chief  concerns  of  the  local  committees,  as  they 
worked  to  secure  a  repudiation  of  the  licence  system,  was  to 
avoid  political  entanglements.  The  Poughkeepsie  Safe¬ 
guard,  a  strong  advocate  of  no-licence,  warned  the  temper¬ 
ance  workers  of  their  great  problem : 

The  difficulty  will  be  to  consolidate  our  forces  and  bring  our 
power  to  bear  with  a  concentrated  energy  upon  the  question. 
“United,  we  stand — divided,  we  fall,”  should  be  the  motto  of  the 
friends  of  temperance;  and  let  us  most  carefully  and  constantly 
bear  in  mind  that  this  is  not  a  political  question.  It  is  not 
to  be  decided  by  arraying  the  two  great  political  parties  against 
each  other — nor  by  forming  a  third  party.  In  this  controversy 
the  friends  of  Polk  and  Dallas,  and  those  of  Clay  and  Freling- 
huysen,  preserve  their  political  predilections,  and  remain  firm  in 
their  respective  political  views  and  principles,  and  as  free  to 
vote  for  their  favorite  candidates  at  the  political  elections  as 
ever,  while  they  now  unite  without  any  distinction  of  party,  to 
put  down  a  common  foe  to  whom  they  are  equally  opposed.  The 
temperance  question  is  common  ground  for  men  of  all  political 
complexions.  The  enemy  they  resist  is  a  common  enemy;  an 
enemy  who  riots  with  equal  zest  and  equal  power  upon  Whig 
and  Loco-foco  blood.38 

Not  all  of  the  reformers  gave  heed  to  this  timely  warning. 
Greeley  invariably  linked  his  temperance  propaganda  with 
his  political  arguments.  In  the  Tribune  he  denounced  the 

35  Journal,  July,  1845,  p.  100. 

33  Quoted  in  Journal,  July,  1845,  p.  103.  See  also  same  copy  of  the 
Journal,  p.  105. 


280  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

“Loco-focos”  as  the  party  of  the  liquor  interests.  They 
were  responsible  for  the  provision  in  the  excise  law 
wThich  prevented  New  York  County  from  ridding  itself  of  the 
licence  system.  They  had  defended  the  liquor  dealer  by 
their  votes  in  the  state  legislature.  It  was  evident  that  the 
temperance  forces  could  hope  for  little  support  from  the 
“Loco-foco”  ranks.37  As  the  autumn  elections  approached, 
Greeley  advocated  Whig-Temperance  tickets  to  prevent  con¬ 
trol  of  the  legislature  from  passing  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemies  of  local  option.  Furthermore,  if  such  tickets  could 
be  elected  in  certain  assembly  districts,  there  was  a  possi¬ 
bility  that  the  excise  law  might  be  amended  so  as  to  permit 
every  part  of  the  state  to  vote  on  the  question  of  liquor 
licences.38  This,  of  course,  was  a  plea  for  local  option  in  the 
metropolis.  Although  Delavan  and  Marsh,  who  were  man¬ 
aging  the  campaign  throughout  the  state,  scrupulously 
avoided  all  political  entanglements,  they  allowed  Greeley  to 
play  his  own  game,  for  they  found  that  his  influence  with 
the  Whigs  more  than  offset  the  power  of  the  enemies  he 
made  among  the  “Loco-focos.”  Besides,  the  large  circula¬ 
tion  of  the  Tribune  in  northern  and  western  counties  was  one 
of  the  greatest  factors  in  unifying  the  efforts  of  widely 
scattered  temperance  organizations. 

As  early  as  July,  1845,  the  no-licence  workers  began  their 
drive  for  votes.  In  every  county  vigilance  committees  were 
formed  which  supervised  the  publication  and  distribution  of 
literature.  A  central  vigilance  committee,  of  which  Edward 
C.  Delavan  was  chairman,  received  reports  from  county 
workers  and  furnished  speakers  and  funds  to  the  sections 
that  most  needed  them.  On  August  27  a  convention  of  the 
western  districts  was  held  at  Rochester  to  establish  a  closer 
connection  between  the  various  town  and  city  committees. 
This  was  preliminary  to  a  state  convention  which  met  at 

37  TV.  Y.  Tribune,  July  18,  August  30,  1845. 

38  Ibid.,  Sept.  4,  1845. 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION 


281 

the  same  place  in  October  and  made  provision  for  adequate 
revenues  to  finance  the  campaign.  The  state  central  com¬ 
mittee  was  authorized  to  place  temperance  pamphlets  in 
every  home  just  prior  to  the  election.  Accordingly,  during 
March  and  April,  1846,  appeals  designed  to  interest  mer¬ 
chants  and  manufacturers,  farmers  and  mechanics  were 
distributed  in  each  county  through  the  co-operation  of  the 
local  organization.  A  special  circular  was  prepared  for 
the  most  numerous  foreign  element  in  the  state,  the  Irish.39 

This  widespread  and  wisely  directed  propaganda,  supple¬ 
mented  by  the  personal  work  of  hundreds  of  enthusiasts, 
proved  surprisingly  effective.  The  result  of  the  balloting 
on  April  27  was  a  victory  that  went  far  beyond  the  expecta¬ 
tions  of  the  most  optimistic.  Nearly  five-sixths  of  the 
towns  and  incorporated  municipalities  reported  no-licence 
majorities.  In  a  number  of  counties  every  town  voted 
against  the  sale  of  intoxicants.  The  reformers  had  been 
confident  of  carrying  the  smaller  towns  in  sections  where 
temperance  societies  had  long  been  numerous,  but  they 
doubted  the  popularity  of  their  cause  in  the  urban  districts. 
It  was  gratifying  to  them,  therefore,  to  discover  that  some  of 
the  most  notable  victories  had  been  won  in  such  cities  as 
Albany,  Buffalo,  Brooklyn,  Rochester,  Schenectady,  Troy 
and  Utica.  When  one  went  behind  the  returns,  it  became 
evident  that  the  business  interests  were  willing  to  give  the 
no-licence  principle  a  trial.40 

But  the  rejoicings  of  the  temperance  folk  were  speedily 
stilled.  No  sooner  was  the  result  known  than  the  liquor 
dealers  began  to  circulate  petitions  for  another  election  the 
following  year.41  When  the  necessary  signatures  had  been 
secured,  the  legislature  set  April  27,  1847,  as  the  date  for  a 

39  Journal,  October,  1845,  p.  146,  December,  1845,  p.  184,  April,  1846, 
pp.  50—51. 

*oJbld.,  June,  1846,  pp.  89-90,  July,  p.  97. 

Ibid,.,  J uly,  1846,  p.  97. 


282  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

second  referendum.  In  the  ensuing  campaign  the  chief  issue 
was  the  enforcement  of  the  prohibitory  features  of  the  excise 
law.  Supporters  of  the  old  licence  system  insisted  that  the 
retail  liquor  trade  could  not  be  suppressed  by  legislation, 
since  laws  of  a  prohibitory  character  could  not  be  enforced. 
They  stated  their  position  succinctly  in  the  slogan :  More 
has  been  sold  since  no-licence  than  before.  This  line  of  at¬ 
tack  was  calculated  to  win  the  votes  of  those  temperance 
advocates  who  had  acquiesced  unwillingly  in  the  repeal  of 
the  former  licence  system.  It  proved  to  be  excellent  strat¬ 
egy,  for  the  failure  to  suppress  the  liquor  traffic  in  no-licence 
communities  was  heralded  abroad  as  an  indication  that  no 
sort  of  prohibitory  statute  could  be  enforced.  The  “law¬ 
lessness”  that  was  encouraged  by  the  refusal  to  grant  liquor 
licences  was  a  compelling  reason  for  a  return  to  the  old 
order  of  lawful  sale  under  state  control. 

In  the  face  of  this  attack  the  friends  of  the  existing  law 
were  apathetic.  Whether  they  believed  that  the  results  of 
the  experiment  spoke  for  themselves,  or  that  the  previous 
decision  at  the  polls  would  not  be  reversed,  does  not  appear. 
At  any  rate,  they  failed  to  make  the  same  vigorous  campaign 
in  1847  that  they  had  made  in  1846.  Some  of  the  leaders 
felt  that  this  lack  of  enthusiasm  was  a  direct  result  of  re¬ 
liance  on  legislation,  and  they  minced  no  words  in  denouncing 
the  theory  that  a  law  could  banish  intemperance.42  In  view 
of  this  indifference  and  disillusionment  it  was  not  surprising 
that  the  no-licence  advocates  suffered  a  defeat  at  the  polls. 
More  than  half  of  the  towns  and  cities  which  had  prohibited 
the  sale  of  liquors  a  year  before  voted  to  authorize  the  grant- 

42  Reuben  Tinker,  Address  (Westfield,  N.  Y.,  1847);  J.  Henry  Clark, 
The  Present  Position  and  Claims  Of  the  Temperance  Enterprise,  pp. 
9-15;  L.  Armstrong,  The  Temperance  Reformation,  pp.  47-48;  N.  Y, 
Tribune,  July  15,  17,  18,  1846.  Greeley  denounced  the  Buffalo  Daily 
Olobe  for  urging  the  liquor  dealers  to  support  the  “Loco-Foco”  ticket. 
Tribune,  Sept.  29,  1846. 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION  283 

ing  of  licences  for  the  ensuing  year.43  The  dealers  in  in¬ 
toxicants  had  recovered  much  lost  ground.  Political  leaders 
were  not  slow  to  appreciate  the  significance  of  the  verdict. 
Immediately  Democrats  and  Whigs  in  the  legislature  vied 
with  each  other  to  secure  a  revision  of  the  excise  law.  A 
bill  to  repeal  the  local  option  provisions  and  restore  the 
licence  system  in  all  towns  and  cities  of  the  state  passed 
the  lower  house  by  a  vote  of  69  to  38.  In  the  senate  there 
were  only  two  votes  against  it.44  The  politicians,  encour¬ 
aged  by  a  popular  referendum,  had  put  an  end  to  local  op¬ 
tion,  but  the  temperance  leaders  served  notice  that  they  had 
only  begun  to  fight. 

At  the  same  time  that  New  York  voters  were  registering 
their  dissatisfaction  with  restrictive  measures,  the  electorate 
of  Maine  had  returned  candidates  to  the  legislature  who  were 
in  favour  of  suppressing  the  retail  sale  of  intoxicants.  In 
no  other  state  were  the  forces  hostile  to  the  liquor  interests 
so  well  organized  or  so  completely  under  the  spell  of  a  single 
leader.  For  almost  a  decade  Neal  Dow,  a  well-known  mer¬ 
chant  of  Portland,  had  been  recognized  as  the  astute  di¬ 
rector  of  temperance  propaganda.  Neither  in  the  tanning 
business  of  Josiah  Dow  and  Son,  nor  in  his  own  speculations 
in  timber  lands,  did  Dow  display  more  ability  than  in  the 
task  of  marshalling  votes  against  the  liquor  dealers.  Born 
in  1801  of  Quaker  parents,  he  had  grown  to  manhood  in  a 
home  where  the  discipline  of  the  Society  of  Friends  was 
faithfully  observed.  Scarcely  had  he  reached  his  majority 
when  he  became  an  earnest  advocate  of  the  teachings  of  his 
sect  with  regard  to  the  use  of  alcoholic  stimulants.  At 

43  Journal,  June,  1847,  p.  92. 

44  IV.  F.  Assembly  Journal,  70th  session,  p.  1403.  The  vote  in  the 
lower  house  stood:  For  repeal  of  local  option,  39  “Loco-focos”  and  30 
Whigs;  against  repeal,  11  “Loco-foeos”  and *27  Whigs.  Journal,  June, 
1847,  p.  92. 


284  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

every  opportunity  he  made  his  influence  felt  in  the  com¬ 
munity.  As  a  member  of  the  Deluge  Engine  Company  he 
was  instrumental  in  persuading  the  firemen  to  enforce  the 
principle  of  total  abstinence  at  all  their  meetings.  With 
the  assistance  of  William  W.  Thomas,  an  associate  in  his 
timber  land  ventures,  he  succeeded  in  preventing  the  drunken 
excesses  so  long  associated  with  Fourth  of  July  celebrations 
in  Portland.  He  was  responsible  for  the  adoption  of  a  reso¬ 
lution  by  the  Maine  Charitable  Mechanics’  Association  urg¬ 
ing  master  workmen  to  stop  furnishing  journeymen  and  ap¬ 
prentices  with  ardent  spirits.45 

As  his  business  interests  broadened,  Dow  became  more 
firmly  convinced  of  the  evils  of  the  liquor  traffic.  It  seemed 
to  him  that  the  economic  aspects  of  the  problem  were  worthy 
of  careful  consideration.  As  an  employer,  he  was  impressed 
by  the  relation  of  intemperance  to  labour  efficiency  ;  as  a  gov¬ 
ernor  of  the  alms-house  and  house  of  correction,  he  came  in 
contact  with  some  of  the  worst  victims  of  the  grog-shop. 
For  the  first  time  he  realized  just  how  much  of  the  tax-payer’s 
money  was  spent  to  repair  the  havoc  wrought  by  alcohol. 
His  experience  was  causing  him  to  take  a  radical  position  in 
the  reform  movement.  When  the  Maine  State  Temperance 
Society  refused  in  1837  to  alter  its  pledge  in  order  to  place 
all  intoxicants  under  the  ban,  Dow  was  one  of  the  first  to 
withdraw  and  help  form  the  Maine  Temperance  Union,  which 
championed  total  abstinence.  At  the  time  he  warned  his  as¬ 
sociates  in  the  new  organization  that  the  temperance  battle 
would  never  be  won  by  moral  suasion.  Not  until  the  manu¬ 
facture  and  sale  of  spirituous  liquors  had  been  made  a  penal 
offence  would  Maine  be  freed  from  the  curse  of  intemper- 

46 

ance. 

Such  a  pronouncement  was  startling  to  many  reformers 

45  Dow,  Reminiscences,  pp.  81-110. 

Dow,  Reminiscences,  pp.  232-233;  Henry  S.  Clubb,  The  Maine 
Liquor  Law,  p.  12, 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION  285 

in  the  state,  but  others  agreed  that  it  indicated  the  future 
course  of  the  reform.  A  resolution  had  already  been  in¬ 
troduced  in  the  legislature  asking  for  the  appointment  of  a 
special  committee  to  investigate  the  operation  of  the  licence 
laws.  The  author  of  the  resolution  was  General  James 
Appleton  who  belonged  to  that  class  of  men  generally  known 
as  fanatics.  From  business  he  had  turned  to  politics  that  he 
might  encourage  legislation  to  remedy  a  number  of  social 
ills.  In  sympathy  with  every  humanitarian  movement,  he 
endorsed  Birney’s  views  on  slavery,  advocated  generous  and 
systematic  relief  for  the  pauper,  and  championed  the  cause 
of  popular  education.  But  his  real  hobby  was  temperance. 
Its  promotion  had  been  his  chief  reason  for  seeking  public 
office.  In  1832  he  had  published  in  the  Salem  Gazette  a 
series  of  articles  to  the  effect  that  intemperance  would  never 
be  banished  from  the  nation  until  the  trade  in  intoxicants 
was  made  illegal.  Five  years  later,  as  a  member  of  the 
Maine  legislature,  he  was  in  a  position  to  propose  a  specific 
law.  As  chairman  of  the  select  committee  on  liquor  licences, 
he  wrote  the  report  to  the  legislature,  recommending  repeal 
of  the  existing  licence  system  and  prohibition  of  the  sale  of 
intoxicants  in  less  quantities  than  twenty-eight  gallons. 
Such  a  measure  would  be  sufficient  for  the  present,  said  the 
committee,  but  the  ultimate  aim  was  state-wide  prohibition 
of  the  liquor  trade.47 

Though  the  legislature  tabled  the  report  without  dis¬ 
cussion,  Appleton’s  effort  had  not  been  in  vain,  for  it  in¬ 
spired  Neal  Dow  to  undertake  a  campaign  in  Portland  to 
modify  the  method  of  granting  licences.  Under  the  state 
law  the  board  of  aldermen  in  each  municipality  was  au¬ 
thorized  to  issue  a  licence  whenever  an  applicant  met  the 
conditions  imposed  in  the  statute.  Dow  insisted  that  so 
far  as  his  own  city  was  concerned  the  authorities  granted 
permits  without  regard  to  the  qualifications  of  the  dealer 
4?  Ibid.,  pp.  243,  244^247. 


286  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

and  without  investigating  the  character  of  the  shops  kept  by 
the  licensees.  He  believed  that  the  public  was  thoroughly 
disgusted  with  such  a  system  and,  if  given  the  opportunity, 
wrnuld  register  its  disapproval  at  the  polls.  Therefore,  he 
urged  the  board  of  aldermen  to  submit  the  matter  to  the 
voters  at  a  special  election,  which  should  be  a  referendum  to 
determine  whether  any  licences  for  the  retailing  of  intoxi¬ 
cants  should  be  granted.  In  1839  the  aldermen,  feeling  that 
the  people  of  the  city  had  been  aroused  by  Dow’s  propa¬ 
ganda,  declared  that  they  would  abide  by  the  mandate  of  the 
citizens.  For  this  first  test  of  voting  strength  the  temper¬ 
ance  forces  organized  a  house  to  house  canvass,  concentrat¬ 
ing  particularly  on  the  business  men  in  an  effort  to  convince 
them  that  a  vote  in  favour  of  licence  was  a  vote  against  their 
own  best  interests.  The  liquor  traffic,  argued  the  reformers, 
took  its  toll  from  the  employer  in  the  form  of  incompetent 
and  irresponsible  employees,  and  from  the  tax-payer  in  the 
form  of  increased  assessments  for  poor  relief  and  penal  insti¬ 
tutions.  The  intensive  campaign  proved  to  be  only  an  ef¬ 
fective  preparation  for  subsequent  work,  since  the  electorate 
instructed  the  aldermen  to  issue  the  usual  licences.48 

Convinced,  in  spite  of  this  defeat,  that  he  would  soon  gain 
a  victory,  Dow  continued  to  keep  the  question  before  the 
public.  During  the  spring  of  1841  the  effects  of  the  Wash¬ 
ingtonian  movement  were  evident  in  Portland,  and  the  tem¬ 
perance  ranks  were  augmented  by  hundreds  of  enthusiastic 
converts.  Dow  was  quick  to  see  the  possibility  of  using  the 
Washingtonians  in  his  own  campaign.  Once  more,  while  in¬ 
temperance  was  being  widely  discussed,  he  pressed  the  city 
authorities  to  refer  the  licence  matter  to  the  voters,  and  won 
his  point.  In  an  ensuing  election  in  1842  the  liquor  interests 
fared  badly  as  a  result  of  Dow’s  success  in  effecting  an  al¬ 
liance  with  the  Washingtonians,  who  seem  to  have  worked  in 

<8  A  majority  of  38  was  given  in  favour  of  licensing  in  a  total  of 
1160.  T.  W.  Organ,  Biographical  Sketch  of  General  Neal  Dow,  p.  2. 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION  287 

harmony  with  the  older  organizations.  By  a  vote  of  943  to 
498  Portland  refused  to  permit  the  retail  sale  of  intoxicants 
within  the  city  limits.49  It  was  an  unmistakable  triumph 
for  the  astute  leadership  of  Dow.  The  rejoicing  of  the  vic¬ 
tors,  however,  was  soon  changed  to  indignation  and  disgust, 
when  it  was  discovered  that  the  overthrow  of  the  licence 
system  did  not  mean  the  passing  of  the  grog-shop.  Those 
who  had  sold  under  fraudulent  licences  Avhile  the  old  system 
was  in  force  were  not  unwilling  to  sell  without  a  licence. 
Rumour  had  it  that  disreputable  establishments,  where  liquor 
was  retailed  illegally,  had  multiplied  rapidly  after  the  re¬ 
fusal  of  the  aldermen  to  grant  permits.  It  was  almost  im¬ 
possible,  however,  to  secure  evidence  that  would  justify 
prosecution.  When  convictions  were  obtained  by  the  au¬ 
thorities,  the  municipal  courts  imposed  either  suspended  sen¬ 
tences  or  trifling  fines.  A  few  months  of  this  flagrant  vio¬ 
lation  of  the  law  convinced  the  prohibitionists  that  it  would 
be  impossible  to  drive  the  liquor  traffic  out  of  Portland  so 
long  as  it  was  tolerated  in  other  parts  of  the  state. 

Out  of  this  conviction  developed  the  movement  to  secure 
relief  from  the  legislature.  During  1843,  as  if  by  common 
consent,  there  were  circulated  in  every  county  petitions  de¬ 
manding  the  enactment  of  a  law  which  would  make  the 
“traffic  in  intoxicants  an  infamous  crime.”  In  February  of 
the  following  year  Neal  Dow  appeared  before  a  legislative 
committee  to  support  the  petitions  with  arguments  drawn 
from  the  experience  of  Portland.  In  conformity  with  his 
suggestions  the  committee  introduced  a  prohibitory  bill, 
which  passed  the  lower  house  but  failed  to  secure  a  majority 
in  the  senate.  For  almost  a  year  the  prohibitionists  lobbied 
with  more  zeal  than  discretion  and  failed  to  force  the  legis¬ 
lature  to  take  action.  Finally,  they  appealed  to  the  people 
over  the  heads  of  the  obstinate  legislators.  It  was  soon  evi- 

40  Dow,  op.  cit.,  pp.  271-280;  Portland  Tribune,  Oct.  26,  1842,  Novem¬ 
ber  16,  1842. 


288  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

dent  that  spontaneous  enthusiasm  for  a  prohibitory  statute 
was  sadly  lacking.  The  people  would  have  to  be  aroused  to 
the  perils  of  the  existing  system.  Once  more  Dow  took  the 
lead  in  the  attempt  to  create  an  opinion  which  would  lead  to 
legislative  action.  Teams  of  workers  were  organized  to 
visit  every  school  district  in  the  state,  that  the  voters  might 
receive  first  hand  information  on  the  necessity  for  prohib¬ 
itory  measures.  Musicians  accompanied  many  of  the  speak¬ 
ers  and  offered  varied  programs  which  attracted  large  au¬ 
diences  to  the  meetings.  Enthusiasm  ran  high  in  the  rural 
districts,  where  almost  every  school  building  housed  at  least 
one  rally  during  the  campaign.  Dow  himself  was  indefat¬ 
igable.  No  matter  how  inclement  the  weather,  he  was  al¬ 
ways  ready  to  meet  his  speaking  engagements,  which  were 
legion  during  the  summer  and  autumn  of  1845.  Neither 
storms  nor  snow-drifted  roads  caused  him  to  deviate  from  an 
exacting  schedule,  and.more  than  one  companion  who  accom¬ 
panied  him  on  his  trips  was  unable  to  keep  up  with  the  pace 
set  by  the  leader.  Many  an  audience  was  inspired  by  his 
forceful  reasoning  and  his  oratorical  denunciation  of  the 
“traffic  and  traffickers.”  Everywhere  his  theme  was  the 
same — a  compelling  appeal  to  the  voters  that  they  support 
only  those  candidates  for  the  legislature,  who  were  pledged 
to  give  the  state  a  prohibitory  law.50 

As  the  campaign  progressed,  Dow  grew  confident  of  vic¬ 
tory.  Just  prior  to  the  election  he  wrote  to  a  friend: 

I  have  within  two  months  travelled  over  four  thousand  miles, 
and  have  come  in  contact  with  many  thousand  citizens,  and  can 
testify  that  I  have  never  before  witnessed  so  deep-rooted  and 
widespread  enthusiasm  among  the  people.  They  now  under¬ 
stand  that  talking  temperance  and  working  for  temperance  will 
do  little  good  unless  they  vote  for  temperance  also;  and  this 
they  are  resolved  to  do.  The  result  of  our  agitation  will  be  the 
expulsion  from  all  the  states  of  the  traffic  in  intoxicating  liquors 

so  Clubb,  op.,  cit.,  pp.  17-18;  Dow,  Reminiscences,  pp.  291-293. 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION  289 

to  be  used  as  a  drink,  but  we  hope  that  the  state  of  Maine  will 
have  the  honor  of  leading  in  this  glorious  reform.51 

This  faith  was  well  founded,  for  the  work  of  persuading  vot¬ 
ers  to  support  temperance  candidates  had  been  skilfully  done 
under  experienced  leaders.  Dow’s  associates  were  no  novices 
in  the  art  of  creating  public  opinion.  John  T.  Walton, 
prominent  in  the  councils  of  the  Whig  party,  was  ever  at 
hand  to  give  advice  and  encouragement.  Luther  Severance, 
editor  of  the  Kennebec  Journal,  kept  the  liquor  question  be¬ 
fore  the  people  of  Augusta,  while  Austin  Willey’s  editorials 
in  the  Portland  Inquirer  advocated  prohibitory  legislation. 
The  distinguished  anti-slavery  editor,  George  H.  Shirley,  was 
a  consistent  supporter  of  Dow’s  views. 

Indeed,  the  one  group  on  which  the  prohibitionists  could 
always  rely  was  the  anti-slavery  element  in  the  state.  The 
determined  enemies  of  human  bondage  wanted  to  be  consid¬ 
ered  foes  of  the  traffic  which  enslaved  men  to  the  vice,  intem¬ 
perance.  They  never  tired  of  pointing  to  the  similarity  be¬ 
tween  the  two  movements.  Dow  testified  to  the  understand¬ 
ing  and  co-operation  between  these  reforms  when  he  wrote: 

The  prohibitory  movement  received  invaluable  assistance  from 
the  distinctively  anti-slavery  element  in  the  state,  that  from  1842 
to  the  organization  of  the  Republican  party  in  1854  maintained 
a  political  organization  in  Maine  known  first  as  the  Liberty 
party,  and  afterwards  as  the  Free  Soil.  .  .  .  Most  of  the  leaders 
in  each  reform  were  interested  and  active  in  both,  exerting  their 
influence  to  make  the  efforts  for  one  contribute  to  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  other,  as  far  as  it  could  be  done  consistently  and 
with  prudence.  To  this  end  the  state  and  county  gatherings  of 
both  agitations  were  generally  held  upon  succeeding  days,  that 
those  attending  the  one  might  more  conveniently  participate  in 
the  other.52 

Organ,  op  cit.,  pp.  2-3. 

82  Dow,  Reminiscences,  pp.  306-307;  Portland  Transcript,  Feb.  27, 
1841. 


290  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

In  Maine,  as  elsewhere,  a  too  close  association  with  aboli¬ 
tionists  was  not  apt  to  be  an  unmitigated  blessing  for  the 
temperance  cause,  but  the  matter  seems  to  have  been  handled 
“with  prudence,”  for  many  of  the  anti-slavery  leaders 
brought  sorely  needed  strength  to  the  prohibitory  movement. 
Such  prominent  members  of  the  Liberty  Party  as  James  Ap¬ 
pleton  and  Samuel  Fessenden  were  conspicuous  foes  of  the 
liquor  traffic.  Charles  A.  Stackpole,  George  H.  Shirley, 
Ezekiel  Holmes,  Samuel  R.  Leavitt  and  S.  M.  Pond,  all  fol¬ 
lowers  of  Birney  or  Garrison,  were  in  the  front  ranks  of  the 
prohibitionists.  The  avowed  Free-Soilers  among  the  clergy, 
David  Thurston,  D.  B.  Randall,  O.  B.  Cheney  and  C.  C. 
Cone,  were  numbered  among  Dow’s  most  valuable  lieutenants 
in  the  campaigns  after  1848.  It  required  consummate  skill 
to  hold  the  support  of  this  group  without  losing  the  good 
will  of  those  who  refused  to  be  classed  with  the  radical  anti¬ 
slavery  agitators.53 

Political  snares,  also,  were  carefully  avoided  by  the  pro¬ 
hibitionists.  They  refused  to  allow  themselves  to  be  in¬ 
trigued  into  admitting  alliance  with  any  party.  Dow  con¬ 
stantly  urged  his  supporters  to  cut  across  party  lines  and 
vote  for  candidates  whose  opinions  on  the  liquor  problem 
were  acceptable.  In  more  than  one  district  prohibition 
Whigs  and  Democrats  united  their  votes  to  elect  their  man. 
As  a  result,  the  demands  of  the  reformers  were  ably  cham¬ 
pioned  in  both  major  parties,  though  the  Whig  politicians 
were  generally  more  interested  in  the  cause  than  the  Demo¬ 
cratic  leaders.  When  the  relative  strength  of  the  licence 
and  anti-licence  forces  w7as  appraised  in  the  session  of  1846, 
it  w7as  evident  that  the  friends  of  prohibition  could  muster 
a  majority  in  both  houses  of  the  legislature.  At  once  a  bill 
was  introduced.  After  public  hearings  before  a  joint  com- 

53  Appleton  and  Fessenden  had  both  been  Liberty  candidates  for 
governor.  Dow,  Reminiscences,  pp.  306-307. 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION  291 

mittee  the  final  draft  became  law  on  August  7,  1846.  The 
licence  system  had  been  overthrown.  By  the  terms  of  the 
statute  the  sale  of  intoxicating  liquors  for  beverage  pur¬ 
poses  was  prohibited,  except  in  the  case  of  wholesalers  and 
importers  who  sold  in  quantities  greater  than  twenty-eight 
gallons.  The  selectmen  in  each  town  were  authorized  to 
license  persons  to  retail  for  mechanical  and  medicinal  pur¬ 
poses.  While  the  law  was  not  satisfactory  to  the  more  rad¬ 
ical  reformers,  since  their  goal  was  absolute  prohibition 
rather  than  highly  restrictive  regulation,  it  contained  what 
the  legislators  thought  their  constituents  desired  at  the 
time.54 

The  possibilities  of  evading  the  newr  statute  were  obvious. 
Its  enforcement  depended  largely  upon  the  manner  in  which 
the  town  selectmen  used  their  licensing  power.  Since  no 
state  enforcement  machinery  was  created,  the  sentiment  of 
the  local  group  determined  the  extent  to  which  the  law  was 
obeyed.  In  communities  unsympathetic  with  the  purposes 
of  the  new  regulations  it  was  a  simple  matter  to  permit  the 
grog-shop  and  tippling-house  to  thrive  under  regular 
licences.  Local  authorities  in  the  larger  towns  became  noto¬ 
rious  for  their  refusal  to  punish  retailers  who  made  illegal 
sales.  Resorts  of  low  character  found  refuge  behind  the 
pretext  that  they  were  selling  liquor  for  mechanical  and 
medicinal  purposes.  It  required  endless  litigation  to  prove 
that  they  were  violating  the  law.  The  prohibitionists  got 
little  satisfaction  when  they  appealed  to  the  state  govern¬ 
ment,  for  John  W.  Dana,  the  Democratic  governor,  was  op¬ 
posed  to  restrictive  legislation.  Pressure  brought  to  bear 
upon  the  legislature,  however,  was  more  productive  of  re¬ 
sults.  In  1849  after  considerable  lobbying  a  bill  supple¬ 
mentary  to  the  act  of  1846  was  passed,  which  authorized  the 

54  Public  Laws  of  the  State  of  Maine  (1842-1851),  pp.  189-195;  Dow, 
Reminiscences,  pp.  318-315. 


292  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

appointment  of  special  enforcement  officers  in  each  town  to 
“ferret  out  and  suppress  the  grog-shops.”  Governor  Dana 
vetoed  the  measure,  explaining  his  action  in  a  lengthy  attack 
on  the  principle  of  prohibition.  The  experience  of  the  state 
under  the  existing  law  proved  to  him  that  so  long  as  public 
opinion  countenanced  the  use  of  intoxicants  the  most  elab¬ 
orate  enforcement  machinery  ever  devised  could  not  suppress 
the  liquor  traffic. 

The  governor’s  message  gave  expression  to  the  secret  fear 
of  the  supporters  of  the  law — that  the  public  was  becoming 
convinced  of  the  impossibility  of  enforcing  restrictive  meas¬ 
ures.  It  seemed  to  Dow  that  the  best  antidote  to  the  spread 
of  this  conviction  would  be  a  striking  campaign  to  suppress 
illegal  selling  in  one  of  the  cities  of  the  state.55  He,  there¬ 
fore,  determined  to  strike  for  the  control  of  the  municipal 
government  in  Portland  that  he  might  make  it  a  signal  ex¬ 
ample  of  the  successful  enforcement  of  all  state  laws.  The 
announcement  of  his  candidacy  for  the  Whig  nomination  for 
mayor  in  1850  split  his  party  wide  open.  The  regulars,  who 
apparently  had  control  of  the  situation,  immediately  de¬ 
clared  a  factional  war.  Two  Fillmore  appointees  in  the 
city,  the  postmaster  and  collector  of  the  port,  led  the  at¬ 
tack.  Their  chief  argument  against  Dow  was  on  the  score 
of  party  regularity.  He  was  only  a  nominal  Whig.  On 
several  occasions  he  had  bolted  the  regular  nominees  of  his 
party.  He  had  even  run  as  an  independent  candidate  for 
alderman.  Could  the  Whigs  afford  to  support  an  independ¬ 
ent  in  a  municipal  election?  Would  they  not  lose  the  sup¬ 
port  of  every  loyal  member  of  the  party  by  making  such  a 
nomination?  Why  should  the  reward  of  public  office  go  to 
a  man  who  had  never  turned  his  hand  to  build  up  Whig 
strength  in  Portland? 

ss  During  1848  and  1849  activity  on  the  part  of  temperance  societies 
was  considerably  quickened  by  the  apparent  indifference  to  the  law. 
Portland  Transcript,  May  20,  Oct.  7,  1848,  Feb.  17,  March  3,  1849. 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION  293 

This  attempt  to  read  Dow  out  of  the  party  was  unsuccess¬ 
ful.  His  record  as  a  business  man  stood  him  in  good  stead, 
and  he  received  the  enthusiastic  endorsement  of  those  Whigs 
who  had  followed  him  in  many  a  temperance  campaign.  In 
the  nominating  convention  the  Dow  men  controlled  affairs 
by  an  uncomfortably  narrow  margin,  but  were  able  to  select 
an  entire  city  ticket  satisfactory  to  their  leader.  The 
event  was  now  in  the  hands  of  the  disappointed  faction. 
Would  they  support  the  candidate?  During  the  campaign 
Dow  tried  hard  to  unite  his  party,  but  he  could  get  no  state¬ 
ment  from  the  opposing  group.  When  the  votes  were 
counted,  the  trick  of  the  “regular”  Whigs  was  apparent. 
Rather  than  vote  for  a  Democrat,  they  had  written  in  the 
name  of  Joseph  C.  Noyes.  Noyes  was  not  a  party  to  the 
scheme,  for  he  had  supported  Dow.  The  result,  however, 
was  no  election,  since  no  candidate  had  received  a  clear 
majority.  In  the  subsequent  “run-off”  Dow  was  attacked 
as  an  “abolitionist”  and  a  “fanatic,”  but  enough  Democrats 
voted  for  him  to  give  him  the  victoi'y.  The  city  administra¬ 
tion  was  placed  in  the  hands  of  men  friendly  to  prohibition.56 

In  his  inaugural  address,  April  24,  1851,  the  new  mayor 
outlined  his  program.  He  intended  to  close  every  grog-shop 
in  Portland.  He  would  enforce  the  state  law  without  fear 
or  favour.  Since  he  felt  that  the  law  was  not  well  drawn, 
he  would  urge  the  legislature  to  enact  a  truly  prohibitory 
statute.  At  his  request  the  board  of  aldermen  sent  a  peti¬ 
tion  to  the  Portland  delegation  in  the  legislature  asking  them 
to  support  such  a  measure.  The  representatives  replied  by 
asking  Dow  to  come  to  Augusta  and  direct  the  lobby  for  the 
kind  of  law  that  he  wanted.  The  mayor  accepted  the  invi¬ 
tation  and  took  a  committee  of  aldermen  with  him  to  the 
capital  to  support  his  efforts.  Events  moved  rapidly  after 

56  Dow,  op.  cit.,  pp.  321-326;  Rev.  A.  A.  Miner,  “Neal  Dow  and  his 
Life  Work,”  The  New  England  Magazine,  June,  1894,  pp.  397-412; 
Portland  Transcript,  Feb.  24,  1849,  April  26,  1851. 


294  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

he  reached  Augusta — so  rapidly,  in  fact,  that  the  people  of 
the  state  did  not  keep  up  with  developments.57 

A  special  committee  from  the  legislature,  whose  member¬ 
ship  was  designated  by  Dow,  was  instructed  to  prepare  a 
prohibitory  measure.  Within  two  weeks  it  reported  a  bill, 
which  conformed  in  every  detail  to  the  suggestions  of  the 
reformers  from  Portland.  In  order  that  the  measure  might 
not  be  side-tracked,  Dow  kept  in  close  touch  with  its  progress 
in  both  houses.  An  attempt  to  postpone  deliberation  in  the 
lower  house  was  defeated  by  a  vote  of  89  to  16.  Such  a  de¬ 
cisive  victory  enabled  the  prohibitionists  to  force  an  early 
closing  of  the  debate.  Their  plans  were  carried  out  with 
such  precision  that  the  fate  of  the  bill  was  never  in  doubt. 
It  passed  the  house  by  a  vote  of  81  to  40,  a  majority  of  the 
Democrats  and  Whigs  and  all  the  Free-Soilers  supporting 
it.58  In  the  senate  a  short  filibuster  was  staged  under  the 
direction  of  Senator  Cary  of  the  Aroostook  district,  who  dis¬ 
missed  the  idea  of  prohibition  as  colossal  nonsense  and  cen¬ 
tred  his  attention  on  the  author  of  the  measure.  His 
caricature  of  Dow  was  sufficiently  broad  to  amuse  even  its 
subject. 

This  new  manifestation  of  the  spirit  of  fanaticism  [said  the 
Senator]  originates  in  the  city  of  Portland  under  the  auspices 
of  that  prince  of  fanatics,  the  present  Mayor  of  that  city.  .  .  . 
It  embodies  the  ultra  notions  of  the  wring-necks  of  that  city, 
of  whom  the  Mayor  is  chief.  Has  the  legislature  of  Maine,  and 
a  Democratic  legislature,  too,  become  so  lost  to  dignity  and  to 
self-respect,  as  to  sit  here  the  registrar  of  the  inquisitorial  edicts 
of  the  temperance  fanatics  of  Portland,  headed  by  the  popinjay 
Mayor,  a  Whig  abolitionist  of  the  most  ultra  stripe?  I  met  the 
Mayor  the  other  day  on  the  stairway.  He  is  a  pretty  little 

57  Dow,  Reminiscences,  pp.  331-333;  Portland  Transcript,  May  3,  1851. 

58  In  the  house  the  vote  stood:  For  the  bill  42  Democrats,  31  Whigs 
and  8  Free-Soilers;  against  the  bill  25  Democrats  and  15  Whigs.  In 
the  senate  14  Democrats,  3  Whigs  and  1  Free-Soiler  supported  the 
measure,  while  10  Democrats  opposed.  Ibid;  pp.  334-338. 


PROPHETS  OF  PROHIBITION  295 

dapper  man,  goes  well  dressed,  wears  a  nice  blue  jacket  and 
fancy  vest,  and  his  hat  cocked  on  one  side  of  his  head.  He  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  getting  his  bill  reported  by  the  committee,  word  for 
word  and  letter  for  letter,  as  it  was  prepared  for  them.  ...  A 
few  years  ago  the  jackdaw  Mayor  of  Portland,  this  man  with 
the  fancy  vest,  who  got  up  the  precious  document  the  legislature 
is  called  upon  to  register,  was  at  the  head  of  the  nigger  move¬ 
ment  in  that  city.  He  was  formerly  a  Federalist,  but  Federal¬ 
ism  alone  was  not  low  enough  for  his  instincts,  and  he  joined 
the  abolition  movement;  but  even  abolitionism  was  not  strong 
enough  for  his  diseased  palate,  and  he  has  added  temperanceism 
to  his  former  stock  of  humbugs.  Is  this  Federal-abolition-wring- 
neck  to  be  allowed  to  dictate  to  a  Democratic  legislature  what 
enactments  it  shall  pass?  69 

The  question  which  Senator  Cary  raised  was  speedily  an¬ 
swered  in  the  affirmative,  for  the  Democratic  senate  ap¬ 
proved  Dow’s  measure  by  a  majority  of  eight  votes.  There 
was  no  doubt  of  the  governor’s  attitude.  John  W.  Dana 
had  been  succeeded  by  John  Hubbard,  a  country  doctor 
whose  prejudices  were  all  against  the  liquor  interests.  He 
had  repeatedly  served  notice  that  he  would  sign  any  prohib¬ 
itory  statute  sent  to  him  by  the  legislature.  On  June  2, 
1851,  he  announced  his  approval  of  a  law  which  forbade  the 
manufacture  and  sale  of  intoxicating  liquors  within  the  con¬ 
fines  of  Maine;  authorized  justices  of  the  peace  and  munic¬ 
ipal  judges  to  grant  search  and  seizure  warrants  on  the 
complaint  of  three  voters ;  and  encouraged  enforcement  by 
granting  all  fines  to  the  prosecuting  officers.  Dow’s 
prophecy  for  his  state  had  been  fulfilled.00 

The  passage  of  the  Maine  Law  ivas  hailed  by  the  prohi¬ 
bitionists  as  an  unmistakable  sign  that  the  temperance  move¬ 
ment  had  been  transformed  into  a  campaign  for  prohibitory 
legislation.  Two  generations  of  combat  with  intemperance, 

59  Dow,  Reminiscences,  pp.  338-339. 

60  Public  Laws  of  the  State  of  Maine  (1842-1851),  pp.  416-424. 
One  dealer  was  to  be  licensed  in  each  town  to  sell  liquors  for  mechanical 
and  medicinal  purposes.  Kennebec  Journal,  June  5,  1851. 


296  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

they  said,  had  carried  the  reform  far  beyond  the  first  feeble 
protests  against  the  use  of  ardent  spirits.  Dow’s  victory, 
remote  as  it  seemed  from  the  pioneer  efforts  of  Rush  and 
Beecher,  was,  nevertheless,  a  direct  result  of  the  forces  which 
those  early  temperance  advocates  had  set  in  motion.  It  bore 
witness  to  the  fact  that  the  reformers  had  finally  been  forced 
to  accept  prohibition  as  the  true  solution  of  the  liquor  prob¬ 
lem.  They  had  tried  moral  suasion  for  half  a  century  and 
had  found  it  wanting.  Legal  coercion  was,  therefore,  their 
last  resort.  Principles  and  methods  were  being  changed ; 
new  leaders  had  supplanted  old.  But  the  continuity  of  the 
movement  had  not  and  would  not  be  broken.  The  purpose 
of  the  reform  remained  the  same.  Dow,  like  Beecher  and 
Rush,  had  only  one  objective — to  drive  intemperance  from 
the  land. 


CHAPTER  XII 


A  SUMMARY  VIEW 

One  cannot  study  the  growth  of  temperance  sentiment  in 
the  United  States  and  escape  the  conclusion  that  the  Eight¬ 
eenth  Amendment  was  long  on  its  way.  Its  ratification  was 
not  the  result  of  temporary  conditions  taken  at  their  flood, 
but  the  final  expression  of  a  fundamental  change  which  had 
been  more  than  a  century  in  the  making.  This  formative 
movement,  now  revealing  itself  in  the  guise  of  /prohibition, 
reaches  back  beyond  any  efforts  to  amend  the  Constitution; 
it  took  its  rise  from  early  attempts  to  curb  the  intemperate 
use  of  intoxicants.  It  was  not  a  simple  movement.  Many 
factors,  at  times  apparently  working  at  cross  purposes, 
determined  its  varying  course  and  ultimate  goal.  Its  ranks 
were  swelled  by  recruits  from  every  walk  of  life,  representing 
an  infinite  variety  of  ideas  and  ideals.  The  wide  range  of  its 
propaganda  was  a  fair  indication  of  the  multitude  of  motives 
which  inspired  those  who  laboured  for  its  success. 

It  is  obviously  futile  to  regard  any  or  all  of  these  motives 
as  a  complete  explanation  of  the  present  state  of  affairs, 
for  some  new  forces  entered  the  prohibitory  movement  after 
Neal  Dow  won  his  first  victory  in  Maine.  No  true  appre¬ 
ciation  of  these  later  developments  is  possible,  however,  with¬ 
out  an  understanding  of  the  early  reform.  Fortunately  the 
reformers  themselves,  though  normally  too  busy  with  the  min¬ 
utiae  of  ways  and  means  to  philosophize  about  their  cause, 
probed  occasionally  beneath  surface  indications  in  search  of 
fundamentals.  Whether  their  search  revealed  anything  of 
great  value  may  be  questioned,  but  that  their  findings  are 
worth  consideration  is  certain.  In  the  first  place,  they  were 

297 


298  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

convinced  that  their  cause  was  truly  American,  that  it 
squared  with  American  ideas  and  institutions,  that  it  was 
growth  of  the  soil.  Was  it  not  an  important  element  in 
the  national  awakening  which  followed  the  War  of  1812? 
Did  it  not  indicate  a  quickened  consciousness  on  the  part  of 
the  American  people  that  domestic  problems,  quite  as  seri¬ 
ous  as  any  foreign  complications,  had  been  neglected?  A 
nation,  expanding  politically,  industrially  and  territorially, 
needed  to  take  thought  of  the  materials  with  which  it  was 
building.  It  could  afford  to  support  generously  a  movement 
against  disease  and  poverty,  against  filth  and  misery,  against 
drunken  husbands  wTho  beat  their  wives  and  sent  their  chil¬ 
dren  into  the  street  to  beg,  against  liquor  dealers  who  grew 
rich  while  their  customers  filled  the  alms-houses  and  debtors’ 
prisons. 

Temperance  reformers  who  saw  their  cause  in  this  light 
were  prone  to  emphasize  its  affiliation  with  other  American 
efforts  to  establish  a  more  perfpct.  social  order.  The  people 
of  the  United  States,  it  seemed,  were  testing  out  new  theories 
regarding  the  individual’s  relation  to  the  group.  Extreme 
individualism,  so  characteristic  of  the  young  and  growung 
nation,  was  being  modified  by  a  keener  realization  of  society’s 
responsibility  for  those  unfortunates  who  had  lost  out  in 
life’s  struggle.  A  generation  so  sincerely  interested  in  the 
fate  of  the  pauper,  the  lunatic  and  the  criminal  could  not 
long  remain  unconcerned  about  the  far-reaching  conse¬ 
quences  of  intemperance.  Furthermore  the  liquor  problem 
wras  involved  in  more  than  the  question  of  caring  for  human 
derelicts;  it  was  linked  up  with  any  general  scheme  of  social 
reorganization.  No  community,  whether  large  or  small, 
could  order  its  affairs  “for  the  greatest  good  of  the  greatest 
number,”  unless  its  inhabitants  had  learned  the  lesson  of  in¬ 
dividual  self-control.  Many  temperance  enthusiasts,  there¬ 
fore,  felt  that  their  idea  was  basic.  Stressing  the  principle 
of  self-denial,  abstinence  not  only  freed  men  from  slavish  sub- 


A  SUMMARY  VIEW 


299 

jection  to  appetite,  but  it  prepared  them  through  the  purify¬ 
ing  influence  of  this  asceticism  for  greater  co-operation  with 
their  fellows. 

There  was  also  in  the  temperance  philosophy  a  strong 
conviction  that  the  reform  was  typically  American  in  its  de¬ 
fence  of  the  home.  One  finds  this  both  expressed  and  implied 
in  the  writings  of  Lydia  H.  Sigourney,  Lucius  M.  Sargent 
and  Timothy  Shay  Arthur.  At  the  heart  of  the  matter  was 
a  passionate  concern  for  the  sanctity  of  marriage  and  the 
integrity  of  the  family  circle,  a  determination  that  no  home 
should  be  wrecked  and  no  child  denied  a  fair  chance  in  life 
because  of  a  drunken  parent.  How  shocking  a  travesty  on 
the  ideal  family  group  was  a  household  in  which  an  intem¬ 
perate  husband  forced  the  wife  to  become  the  sole  bread¬ 
winner!  Were  children  who  spent  the  impressionable  years 
of  youth  in  such  an  environment  receiving  the  full  advantages 
of  “the  land  of  equal  opportunity”?  Surely,  a  nation  which 
championed  the  principles  of  liberty  and  equality  was  under 
compulsion  to  guarantee  to  its  children  an  even  start  in  life, 
free  from  all  unnecessary  handicaps.  This,  insisted  the  re¬ 
formers,  should  be  part  of  every  American  youth’s  priceless 
heritage. 

Some  contemporary  writers  seem  to  have  believed  that  the 
most  significant  fact  about  the  temperance  movement  in  the 
United  States  was  its  bearing  upon  the  great  experiment 
being  made  in  democratic  control.  A  government  based  on 
the  consent  of  the  governed,  they  reasoned,  could  not  rise 
any  higher  than  the  people  from  whom  it  took  its  source. 
Consequently,  if  democracy  was  to  succeed,  and  the  whole 
world  was  watching  the  experiment,  the  American  voter 
would  have  to  be  safeguarded  on  every  side,  even  from  the 
folly  of  his  own  vices.  It  was  ridiculous  to  talk  of  the 
“will  of  the  sovereign  people,”  when  intoxicated  citizens  were 
taken  to  the  polls,  and  legislators  were  not  ashamed  to 
parade  their  inebriety  while  discussing  important  public 


300  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

measures.  Intemperance  might  be  tolerated  in  a  divine- 
right  monarchy,  but  in  a  republic  it  endangered  the  very  ex¬ 
istence  of  the  state.  No  popular  government  could  long  en¬ 
dure,  unless  the  electorate  was  persuaded  or  forced  to  follow 
the  straight  and  narrow  path  of  sobriety. 

Both  opponents  and  supporters  of  the  campaign  against 
the  use  of  intoxicants  felt  that  the  greatest  single  force  in 
the  movement  was  the  power  of  evangelical  Protestantism. 
Here,  again,  there  seemed  to  be  something  distinctively 
American  about  the  situation.  Evangelical  sects  in  Europe 
were  not  noted  for  their  insistence  on  conformity  to  the 
principle  of  total  abstinence.  Calvinism,  for  example,  pre¬ 
sented  no  dogmatic  teachings  on  the  subject.  John  Calvin, 
himself,  classed  the  question  of  the  proper  use  of  alcoholic 
beverages  among  “matters  indifferent.”  Scotch  Presbyteri¬ 
anism  could  scarcely  be  considered  hostile  to  the  interests  of 
the  liquor  dealer,  and  it  is  doubtful  whether  Dutch  and  Swiss 
Reformed  churches  were  any  more  severe  than  German  Lu¬ 
theran  in  their  attitude  toward  the  social  glass.  But  the 
case  was  different  in  the  United  States.  It  was  a  matter  of 
grave  concern  to  the  New  England  Puritan  that  his  neigh¬ 
bour’s  manners  and  morals  should  be  acceptable  unto  God. 
Though  the  explanation  of  the  fact  may  escape  us,  it  is 
true  that  American  evangelical  Protestants,  whether  Calvin¬ 
ists  or  not,  were  far  more  inquisitorial  and  censorious  than 
their  European  brethren. 

This  was  early  appreciated  by  temperance  propagandists 
and  they  made  the  most  of  it.  Through  Congregationalism, 
through  the  far-flung  Methodist  and  Baptist  societies,  and 
to  a  less  degree  through  Presbyterianism  the  reform  was 
given  a  religious  significance  which  placed  it  on  the  plane  of 
things  spiritual.  Intemperance  was  of  the  devil ;  it  marked 
a  person  as  belonging  with  the  unregenerate.  His  path  took 
him  among  atheists  and  agnostics,  among  infidels  and  scof¬ 
fers  !  The  spirit  of  God  could  not  dwell  in  him  until  he  had 


A  SUMMARY  VIEW  301 

abandoned  his  sin  and  been  converted.  Since  this  unregen¬ 
erate  state  resulted  directly  from  the  use  of  alcoholic  bev¬ 
erages,  it  was  obvious  that  such  use  constituted  an  obstacle 
of  no  mean  proportions  in  the  path  of  the  church  militant. 
Any  movement  designed  to  remove  the  obstacle  would  be  of 
incalculable  benefit  to  the  cause  of  religion.  Consequently, 
in  the  thinking  of  many  a  religious  zealot  the  temperance  re¬ 
form  and  prohibitory  movement  became  integral  parts  of  the 
church’s  earthly  mission.  Hear  Reverend  George  B.  Chee- 
ver,  staunch  defender  of  orthodox  Calvinism,  explain  what 
he  considers  fundamental : 

This  moral  enterprise  is  removing  one  of  the  most  dreadful 
obstacles  ever  yet  opposed  to  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  Self- 
denying  and  holy  men  have  almost  fruitlessly  devoted  their 
lives  to  this  blessed  object,  because  along  with  every  supply  of 
that  word  which  conveys  the  gift  of  eternal  life,  there  has  been 
sent  to  the  perishing  nations  the  gift  of  intoxication,  the  sure 
producer  of  death  temporal  and  eternal.  Preach  to  the  hea¬ 
then  that  spiritual  gospel  which  commands  the  denying  ungod¬ 
liness  and  every  earthly  lust,  and  at  the  same  time  place  in  their 
hands  and  put  to  their  lips  the  provocation  to  every  sort  of 
crime  that  can  be  named !  Appeal  to  the  reason  and  the  con¬ 
science,  and  at  the  same  time  give  them  to  drink  what  debases 
reason,  and  stupefies  the  conscience,  and  makes  the  whole  being 
earthly,  sensual,  devilish !  Let  the  temperance  reformation  go 
hand  in  hand  with  the  Bible,  and  the  Sabbath  school,  and  the 
tract  in  its  distribution  among  the  wretched,  and  truth  will 
have  power,  and  the  world’s  regeneration  will  be  speedily  ac¬ 
complished.1 

Of  course,  not  all  of  the  reformers  thus  idealized  the  move¬ 
ment.  For  an  ever  increasing  number  the  chief  concern  was 
not  the  suffering  and  cruelty  which  drink  caused,  or  the  souls 
which  it  sent  to  perdition,  but  the  economic  waste  which  it 
involved.  Judge  Cranch’s  estimate  of  1831  that  more  than 

i  American  Quarterly  Observer ,  March,  1833. 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


302 

ninety-four  million  dollars  were  lost  to  the  American  people 
each  year  through  the  liquor  traffic  was  hailed  by  the  practi¬ 
cal  temperance  advocate  as  an  unanswerable  argument.  It 
expressed  in  terms  of  dollars  and  cents  the  major  offences  of 
intoxicants.  Drink  lowered  the  worker’s  efficiency,  reduced 
production,  decreased  consumption,  increased  taxation  and 
endangered  business  prosperity.  Here  was  a  matter  of  su¬ 
preme  importance.  The  burden  of  the  liquor  traffic  on  the 
tax-payer,  said  some,  would  be  more  effective  in  arousing  the 
nation  to  action  than  any  philanthropic  desire  to  save  the  in¬ 
temperate  from  disease  and  poverty.  Not  long  would  the 
man  of  property  pay  an  annual  tax  for  the  support  of  alms¬ 
houses  and  poor  relief,  work-houses  and  jails,  hospitals  and 
asylums,  made  necessary  in  large  part  by  the  consequences 
of  intemperance.  He  would  relieve  himself  of  this  financial 
burden  by  putting  an  end  to  the  business  which  was  respon¬ 
sible  for  it. 

A  further  reason  to  believe  that  this  event  would  not  be 
long  delayed  seemed  apparent  in  the  changing  industrial 
system.  As  workers  were  slowly  but  steadily  concentrated 
under  one  management  in  larger  enterprises,  the  relation  of 
intemperance  to  labour  efficiency  became  a  problem  of  more 
than  passing  interest  to  the  factory-owner.  Arguments, 
which  lacked  force  when  addressed  to  farmers  employing  a 
few  labourers,  were  more  influential  with  manufacturers  who 
regarded  unnecessary  labour-turnover  from  the  viewpoint  of 
diminished  profits.  The  industrial  enterpriser  was  begin¬ 
ning  to  see  in  the  liquor  business  a  potential  menace,  a  men¬ 
ace  not  at  all  lessened  by  the  constant  infiltration  of  foreign¬ 
ers  into  the  United  States.  By  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth 
century  the  prohibitory  movement  enrolled  in  its  ranks  some 
of  the  rising  “captains  of  industry,”  who  were  not  unaware 
of  the  economic  implications  of  the  trade  in  intoxicants. 

Even  if  the  foregoing  theories  are  accepted  as  explanatory 
of  the  movement  for  total  abstinence,  there  still  remains  a 


A  SUMMARY  VIEW  303 

question  concerning  prohibition.  Why  did  prohibitory  laws 
become  the  approved  method  of  solving  the  problems  con¬ 
nected  with  intemperance?  A  partial  answer  is  to  be  found 
in  the  experience  rather  than  the  philosophy  of  the  reform¬ 
ers.  During  the  first  four  decades  of  the  nineteenth  century 
temperance  advocates  generally  refused  to  consider  restric¬ 
tive  legislation  as  a  proper  means  of  effecting  their  object. 
With  a  high  faith  in  the  ultimate  success  of  their  cause  and 
an  optimistic  belief  in  man’s  perfectibility,  they  relied  en¬ 
tirely  on  precept  and  example  to  persuade  their  fellow-men 
of  the  right.  Through  the  instrumentality  of  voluntary  as¬ 
sociations,  bound  by  an  ordinary  pledge  of  good  faith,  they 
carried  their  propaganda  into  thousands  of  American  homes. 
Each  achievement  meant  a  challenge  to  greater  effort. 
From  moderation  in  the  use  of  alcoholic  beverages  they 
moved  forward  to  abstinence  from  ardent  spirits,  and  then 
to  “total  abstinence  from  all  that  can  intoxicate.” 

Their  cause  was  growing  in  popularity  all  the  while,  but  it 
was  not  progressing  rapidly  enough  for  the  more  impatient 
ones.  By  1840  many  were  convinced  that  the  lure  of  profits 
to  be  gained  from  the  liquor  traffic  was  nullifying  their  ef¬ 
forts.  As  population  increased,  the  problem  grew  ever 
larger.  Intemperance  seemed  to  keep  a  step  ahead  of  the 
most  vigorous  pursuit.  Years  of  experience  in  reasoning 
with  individuals  and  groups  were  wearing  down  faith  in  the 
efficacy  of  persuasion  alone.  After  all,  the  task  seemed  a 
bit  too  large  for  the  reformers’  unaided  efforts.  Like  so 
many  other  American  citizens,  face  to  face  with  a  proposi¬ 
tion  too  big  for  individual  initiative,  they  turned  to  the 
Government.  Legal  coercion  would  prevail,  they  reasoned, 
where  argument  and  persuasion  had  failed.  The  work  of  the 
voluntary  associations  would  be  crowned  with  success,  if  sup¬ 
ported  by  the  “strong  arm  of  the  law.” 

This  turning  to  legislation  indicated  no  fatuous  faith  on 
the  part  of  the  reformers  in  the  possibility  of  effecting  an 


304  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

immediate  revolution  in  social  customs.  Some  of  them  re¬ 
alized  the  difficulties  of  their  new  course,  difficulties  of  en¬ 
forcement  as  well  as  of  enactment  of  satisfactory  statutes. 
But  they  were  determined  that  legal  coercion  should  receive 
the  same  full  and  fair  trial  which  had  been  accorded  moral 
suasion.  In  the  Maine  Law  of  1851  they  won  their  first  im¬ 
portant  victory.  It  indicated  that  the  major  portion  of 
the  temperance  forces  would  follow  their  leaders  into  the 
prohibitory  movement,  and  it  forecast  some  of  the  tactics 
and  methods  of  future  campaigns.  The  story  of  those  cam¬ 
paigns,  it  seems  well  to  leave  to  a  subsequent  volume,  wherein 
may  be  chronicled  the  enlightening  successes  and  failures  of 
the  later  reformers. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


I.  PRIMARY  SOURCES 

1.  PUBLIC  RECORDS 

Acts  of  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Province  of  New  Jersey, 
Samuel  Allinson,  editor.  Burlington,  1776. 

Archives  of  Maryland.  41  vols.  Baltimore,  1883—1922. 

A  Collection  of  the  Statutes  of  England  now  in  force  in  the  State 
of  North  Carolina,  Francois  Martin,  editor,  Philadelphia, 
1792. 

Colonial  Laws  of  New  York  from  the  Year  1661^  to  the  Revo¬ 
lution.  5  vols.  Albany,  1894—1896. 

Colonial  Records  of  North  Carolina.  26  vols.  Raleigh, 
1886—. 

Colonial  Records  of  the  State  of  Georgia.  24  vols.  Atlanta, 
1904-1915. 

Documents  and  Records  relating  to  the  Province  of  New  Hamp¬ 
shire.  31  vols.  Concord,  1867-1907. 

Documents  relative  to  the  Colonial  History  of  the  State  of  New 
York.  15  vols.  Albany,  1856— 1S87. 

Duke  of  Yorke’s  Book  of  Laws.  Harrisburg,  1879. 

Public  Laws  of  South  Carolina,  J.  F.  Grimke,  editor.  Newbern, 
N.  C.,  1790. 

Public  Records  of  the  Colony  of  Connecticut.  15  vols.  Hart¬ 
ford,  1850-1890. 

Pennsylvania  Archives.  Third  series.  Philadelphia,  1852- 
1899. 

Records  of  the  Colony  of  New  Plymouth.  12  vols.  Boston, 
1855-1861. 

Records  of  the  Colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Planta¬ 
tions.  10  vols.  Providence,  1856—1865. 

Records  of  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Massachusetts  Bay , 
5  vols.  Boston,  1853-1854. 

305 


306  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

Statutes  at  Large,  being  a  collection  of  all  the  laws  of  Virginia, 
1619-1792.  13  vols.  Philadelphia  and  New  York,  1823. 

(Hening.) 


2.  TEMPERANCE  RECORDS  AND  REPORTS 

Anniversary  Report  of  the  Pennsylvania  State  Temperance 
Society.  Philadelphia,  1833. 

Annual  Report  of  the  Maryland  State  Temperance  Society. 
Baltimore,  1842. 

Annual  Report  of  the  Massachusetts  Society  for  the  Suppression 
of  Intemperance.  Boston,  1818—1820. 

Annual  Report  of  the  New  York  State  Temperance  Society. 
Albany,  1833. 

Constitution  and  Laws  of  the  Temperance  Beneficial  Associ¬ 
ation.  New  York,  1838. 

Constitution  of  the  Providence  County  Temperance  Society. 
Providence,  1838. 

Documents  and  Records  of  the  Massachusetts  Temperance  So¬ 
ciety.  Boston,  1855. 

First  Annual  Report  of  the  Congressional  Temperance  Society. 
Washington,  D.  C.,  1834. 

Journal  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Division  of  the  Sons 
of  Temperance  of  New  York.  New  York,  1845—1846. 

Journal  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Division  of  the  Sons  of 
Temperance  of  Pennsylvania.  Philadelphia,  1848—1849. 

Permanent  Temperance  Documents.  4  vols.  New  York,  1852. 

Proceedings  of  the  Convention  for  the  Promotion  of  the  Cause 
of  Temperance.  Washington,  D.  C.,  1833. 

Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  Massachusetts  Society  for  the 
Suppression  of  Intemperance.  Boston,  1831. 

3.  CONTEMPORARY  HISTORIES  AND  DESCRIPTIONS 

Abdv,  Edward  S.,  Journal  of  a  residence  and  tour  in  the  United 
States  of  America  from  April,  18SS  to  October,  1881f.  3 

vols.  London,  1834. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  307 

Acrelius,  Israel,  Description  of  the  former  and  present  con¬ 
dition  of  the  Swedish  Churches  in  what  was  called  New 
Sweden.  1759.  Historical  Society  of  Pennsylvania,  Mem¬ 
oirs,  XI. 

Alexander,  J.  E.,  Transatlantic  Sketches.  2  vols.  London, 
1833. 

Alsop,  George,  A  Character  of  Maryland,  N.  D.  Mereness,  ed¬ 
itor.  Cleveland,  1902. 

Blanchard,  Claude,  The  Journal  of,  Thomas  Balch,  editor.  Al¬ 
bany,  1876. 

Bradford,  William,  History  of  Plymouth  Plantation,  1606-164-6, 
William  T.  Davis,  editor.  New  York,  1908. 

Brissot  de  Warville,  J.  P.,  New  Travels  in  the  United  States 
of  America.  Translated  from  the  French.  New  York, 
1792. 

Burnaby,  Andrew,  Travels  through  the  Middle  Settlements  in 
North  America,  in  the  years  1759  and  1760.  London,  1775. 

Candler,  Isaac,  A  Summary  View  of  America.  London,  1824. 

Chastellux,  Francois-Jean  de,  Travels  in  North  America  in 
1780,  1781,  1782.  New  York,  1828. 

Coke,  R.  T.,  A  Subaltern’s  Furlough.  2  vols.  New  York,  1833. 

Danckaerts,  Jasper,  Journal  of,  B.  B.  James,  and  J.  F.  Jameson, 
editors.  New  York,  1913. 

Duncan,  John  M.,  Travels  through  part  of  the  United  States  and 
Canada  in  1818  and  1819.  2  vols.  New  York,  1823. 

Dunton,  John,  Letters  from  New  England.  Prince  Society, 
Boston,  1867. 

Fearon,  Henry  B.,  A  Narrative  of  a  Journey  .  .  .  through  the 
Eastern  and  Western  States  of  America.  2nd  ed.  London, 
1818. 

Finch,  I.,  Travels  in  the  United  States  of  America  and  Canada. 
London,  1833. 

Hall,  Basil,  Travels  in  North  America  in  the  years  1827  and 
1828.  3  vols.  Edinburgh,  1829. 

Hall,  Francis,  Travels  in  Canada  and  the  United  States  in  1816 
and  1817.  Boston,  1818. 

Hamilton,  Thomas,  Men  and  Manners  in  America.  2  vols. 
Philadelphia,  1833. 


308  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

Alexander  Hamilton’s  Itinerarium,  Albert  B.  Hart,  editor.  St. 
Louis,  1907. 

Harriott,  John,  Struggles  Through  Life.  2  vols.  London, 
1808. 

Hodgson,  Adam,  Letters  from  North  America.  2  vols.  Lon¬ 
don,  1824. 

Holmes,  Isaac,  An  Account  of  the  United  States,  London,  1824. 

Itinerant  Observations  in  America  (London,  1745).  Historical 
Society  of  Georgia,  Collections,  IV. 

Jameson,  J.  Franklin,  editor.  Narratives  of  New  Netherland. 
New  York,  1909. 

Janson,  Charles  William,  The  Stranger  in  America.  London, 
1808. 

Jones,  Hugh,  The  Present  State  of  Virginia  (1724).  New 
York,  1865. 

Josselyn,  John,  An  Account  of  Two  Voyages  to  New  England 
Made  During  the  Years  1638,  1663.  Boston,  1895. 

Kalm,  Peter,  Travels  into  North  America.  2  vols.  Warring¬ 
ton,  1770. 

William  Logan’s  Journal  (1745).  Pennsylvania  Magazine, 
XXXVI. 

Lechford,  Thomas,  Plain  Dealing.  Boston,  1867- 

Mather,  Cotton,  History  of  the  War  with  the  Indians  in  New 
England,  Samuel  G.  Drake,  editor.  Boston,  1862. 

Melish,  John,  Travels  in  the  United  States  of  America  in  the 
years  1806,  1807  and  1809,  1810  and  1811.  Philadelphia, 
1812. 

Mereness,  Newton  D.,  editor.  Travels  in  the  American  Colonies. 
New  York,  1916. 

Michaud,  F.  A.,  Travels  to  the  West  of  the  Alleghany  Moun¬ 
tains.  2  vols.  London,  1805. 

Neilson,  Peter,  Recollections  of  a  six  years’  residence  in  the 
United  States.  Glasgow,  1830. 

Ramsay,  David,  The  History  of  South  Carolina.  2  vols. 
Charleston,  1809. 

Robb,  Kate  M.,  editor,  A  Tour  through  Indiana  in  1810.  New 
York,  1920. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  309 

Royally  Anne,  Sketches  of  History,  Life  and  Manners  in  the 
United  States.  New  Haven,  1826. 

Stuart,  James,  Three  Years  in  America.  2  vols.  Edinburgh, 

1833. 

Tudor,  Henry,  Narrative  of  a  Tour  in  North  America.  2  vols. 
London,  1834. 

Winthrop,  John,  The  History  of  New  England,  James  Savage, 
editor.  Boston,  1825. 

4.  TEMPERANCE  PERIODICALS 
(Dates  indicate  files  consulted ) 

Almanac  of  the  American  Temperance  Union.  New  York,  1840— 

1845. 

American  Quarterly  Temperance  Magazine.  Albany,  1833- 

1834. 

American  Temperance  Preacher  (monthly).  New  Haven,  1848. 
The  Cold  Water  Army  (weekly).  Boston,  1841—1842. 
Columbia  Washingtonian  (weekly).  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  1842—1843. 
The  Crystal  Fount  (monthly).  Baltimore,  1847. 

The  Enquirer  (quarterly).  Albany,  1843-1844. 

The  Fountain  (annual).  Boston,  1847-1848. 

The  Fountain  (annual).  Philadelphia,  1847. 

Journal  of  the  American  Temperance  Union  (monthly).  Phila¬ 
delphia  and  New  York,  1837-1850. 

Journal  of  Humanity  (weekly).  Andover,  Mass.,  1829—1832. 
National  Temperance  Offering  (annual).  New  York,  1850— 
1851. 

' New  York  Organ  (weekly).  New  York,  1844-1846. 
Pennsylvania  Temperance  Recorder  (monthly).  Philadelphia, 
1835-1837. 

T  emperance  Almanac  (annual).  Albany,  1840-1843. 
Temperance  Herald  (weekly).  Baltimore,  1834—1836. 

T emperance  Offering  (annual).  New  York,  1848—1850. 

The  Temperance  Offering  (monthly).  Salem,  Mass.,  1845. 
Temperance  Offering  and  Youth’s  Cascade  (monthly)  Boston, 

1846. 

Temperance  Recorder  (weekly).  Albany,  1832—1836. 


310  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

Youth’s  Temperance  Advocate  (monthly).  New  York,  1839- 
1850. 

5.  TEMPERANCE  TRACTS  AND  PUBLICATIONS 

Abbot,  Abiel,  An  Address  delivered  before  the  Massachusetts 
Society  for  the  Suppression  of  Intemperance.  Cambridge, 
Mass.,  1815. 

Adams,  John  Q.,  Address  to  the  Norfolk  County  Temperance 
Society.  Boston,  1842. 

Address  by  the  Hampshire  Convention  of  the  Friends  of  the 
License  Law.  Northampton,  1838. 

An  Address  to  the  Churches  and  Congregations  of  the  Western 
District  of  Fairfield  County.  Hartford,  1813. 

Appleton,  Jesse,  An  Address  delivered  before  the  Massachusetts 
Society  for  the  Suppression  of  Intemperance.  Boston, 
1816. 

Arthur,  Timothy  S.,  A  Christmas  Box  for  the  Sons  and  Daugh¬ 
ters  of  Temperance.  Philadelphia,  1847. 

Six  Nights  with  the  Washingtonians.  Philadelphia,  1842. 

Ten  Nights  in  a  Bar-Boom.  Philadelphia,  1855. 

Bacon,  Leonard,  A  Discourse  on  the  Traffic  in  Spirituous  Liquors. 
New  Haven,  1838. 

Bannatyne,  J.,  Intemperance  Among  Literary  Men.  Portland, 
Maine,  1842. 

Barbour,  I.  Richmond,  A  Statistical  Table  showing  the  influence 
of  intemperance  on  the  churches.  Boston,  1831. 

Barnes,  Albert,  The  Causes  of  Intemperance  in  Cities  and  Large 
Towns.  Morristown,  N.  J.,  1828. 

Bates,  Joshua,  Two  Sermons  on  Intemperance.  Dedham,  Mass., 
1814. 

Beecher,  Lyman,  Six  Sermons  on  the  nature,  occasions,  signs, 
evils  and  remedy  of  intemperance.  Boston,  1827. 

Beman,  Nathan  S.  S.,  The  Crisis  and  the  Triumph.  Troy,  N.  Y., 
1846. 

Benezet,  Anthony,  The  Mighty  Destroyer  Displayed.  Phila¬ 
delphia,  1774. 

Remarks  on  the  Nature  and  Bad  Effects  of  Spirituous 
Liquors.  Philadelphia,  1778. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  311 

Bonner,  T.  D.,  editor,  The  Mountain  Minstrel.  Concord,  N.  H., 
1847. 

Bound,  John  James,  The  Means  of  Curing  and  Preventing  In¬ 
temperance.  New  York,  1820. 

Brantly,  William  T.,  Total  abstinence  from  all  intoxicants — the 
only  safeguard.  Philadelphia,  1833. 

Cary,  S.  F.,  The  Liquor  Manufacture  and  Traffic.  New  York, 
1849. 

Channing,  Walter,  Thoughts  on  the  Origin,  Nature,  Principles 
and  Prospects  of  the  Temperance  Reform.  Boston,  1834. 

Channing,  William  Ellery,  An  Address  on  Intemperance.  Bos¬ 
ton,  1837. 

Cheever,  G.  B.,  The  Dream,  or  Deacon  Giles’  Distillery.  Bos¬ 
ton,  1838. 

The  True  History  of  Deacon  Giles’  Distillery.  New  York, 
1844. 

Circular  to  Immigrants.  New  York,  1833. 

Clark,  J.  H.,  The  Present  Position  and  Claims  of  the  Tem¬ 
perance  Enterprise.  New  York,  1847. 

Cleaveland,  E.  L.,  A  Discourse  on  the  Existing  State  of  Morals 
in  the  City  of  New  Haven.  New  Haven,  1850. 

Considerations  on  the  customary  use  of  Spirituous  Liquors.  By 
a  Philanthropist.  Burlington,  N.  J.,  1811. 

Correspondence  on  the  Principles  of  Right  Reasoning  Applicable 
to  Temperance.  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  1836. 

Craneh,  W.,  An  Address  delivered  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the 
Washington  City  Society.  Alexandria,  Va.,  1831. 

Cross,  Marcus  E.,  The  Mirror  of  Intemperance.  Philadelphia, 
1849. 

Davis,  Gustavus  F.,  A  Sermon.  Hartford,  1831. 

Davis,  James  M.,  The  Two  Immortal  Queens.  Woonsocket, 
R.  I.,  1846. 

Delavan,  E.  C.,  Adulterations  of  Liquors.  New  York,  1850. 

Dickinson,  Austin,  Appeal  to  the  American  Youth  on  Tem¬ 
perance.  New  York,  1848. 

Dimmick,  Luther  F.,  Intemperance.  Newburyport,  Mass., 
1824. 

The  Drunkard,  or  the  Fallen  Saved.  Boston,  1847. 


312  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

Duffield,  George,  Jr.,  Samson  Shorn,  and  his  lock  renewed. 
Philadelphia,  1855. 

Dunlap,  William,  Thirty  Years  Ago,  or  Memoirs  of  a  Water 
Drinker.  New  York,  1837. 

Edwards,  Justin,  Letter  to  the  friends  of  Temperance  in  Massa¬ 
chusetts.  Boston,  1836. 

The  Well-Conducted  Farm.  Andover,  Mass.,  1825. 

Temperance  Manual.  New  York,  1847. 

Finn,  Matthew  D.,  Moral  and  Temperance  Table  Book.  New 
York,  1843. 

Frost,  Henry  R.,  Address.  Charleston,  S.  C.,  1832. 

Gallaudet,  Edward,  Progress  of  Intemperance.  Boston,  1831. 

Greeley,  Horace,  Alcoholic  Liquors,  Their  essential  nature  and 
necessary  effects  on  the  Human  Constitution.  New  York, 
1849. 

Hall,  Edward  B.,  The  Temperance  Reform.  Boston,  1840. 

Hall,  John,  The  Harvey  Boys.  Philadelphia,  1834. 

Harbaugh,  Henry,  A  Word  in  Season,  or,  A  Plea  for  legislative 
aid  in  putting  down  the  evils  of  Intemperance.  Chambers- 
burg,  Pa.,  1846. 

Hertell,  Thomas,  An  Expose  of  the  Causes  of  Intemperate 
Drinking.  New  York,  1819. 

Hitchcock,  Edward,  An  Argument  for  Early  Temperance.  Bos¬ 
ton,  1837. 

An  Essay  on  Alcoholic  and  Narcotic  Substances,  as  articles  of 
common  use.  Amherst,  Mass.,  1830. 

Hoover,  Charles,  Intemperance  in  Relation  to  Family  Interests 
and  Happiness.  New  York,  1849. 

Hunt,  Thomas  P.,  The  Cold  Water  Army.  Boston,  1840. 

It  will  never  injure  me.  Philadelphia,  1846. 

The  wedding  days  of  former  times.  Philadelphia,  1845. 

Jeffries,  Henry,  The  Religious  Objection  to  Teetotalism.  New 
York,  1840. 

Jewett,  Charles,  The  Temperance  Cause,  Past,  Present  and  Fu¬ 
ture.  Hartford,  Conn.,  1865. 

The  Temperance  Toy.  Boston,  1840. 

Youth’s  Temperance  Lecturer.  Boston,  1840. 

Keener,  Christian,  The  House  Old  Nick  Built.  Baltimore,  1834. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  313 

Kercheval,  John,  An  Address  proposing  a  new  temperance  or¬ 
ganization.  St.  Louis,  1848. 

Kitchel,  H.  D.,  Appeal  to  the  People  for  the  Suppression  of  the 
Liquor  Traffic.  New  York,  1848. 

Kittredge,  Jonathan,  An  Address  upon  the  Effects  of  Ardent 
Spirits.  Boston,  1829. 

Letters  to  the  Hon.  Harrison  Gray  Otis  by  a  citizen  of  Massa¬ 
chusetts.  Boston,  1839. 

Letters  to  the  Mechanics  of  Boston.  Boston,  1831. 

Lincoln,  Abraham,  An  Address  delivered  before  the  Springfield 
Washingtonian  Temperance  Society,  Feb.  22,  181/.2.  Spring- 
field,  Ill.  1882. 

Mann,  Cyrus,  The  Clinton  Family,  Boston,  1833. 

Mann,  Horace,  Effects  of  Intemperance  on  the  Rich  and  Edu¬ 
cated.  Syracuse,  1852. 

Marsh,  John,  The  Boy’s  Temperance  Book.  New  York,  1848. 

An  Exposition  of  the  Excise  Law  of  the  State  of  New  York. 
New  York,  1846. 

The  Hand  of  God  in  the  Reformation  of  Drunkards.  New 
York,  1842. 

Hannah  Hawkins,  the  Reformed  Drunkard’s  Daughter.  New 
York,  1849. 

Putnam  and  the  Wolf.  Hartford,  Conn.,  1829. 

Marshall,  Thomas  F.,  The  Speeches  of  Thomas  F.  Marshall  on 
Alcohol  and  Intemperance  and  Fashionable  Wine-Drinking. 
New  York,  1842. 

Substance  of  an  Address  on  Temperance  delivered  before 
City  Hose  Company  #33.  New  York,  1842. 

Mather,  Cotton,  The  Bostonian  Ebenezer.  Old  South  Leaflets, 
I,  67. 

Sober  Considerations  on  a  Growinq  Flood  of  Iniquity.  Bos¬ 
ton,  1708. 

Mather,  Increase,  Woe  to  Drunkards.  Boston,  1673. 

Mussey,  Reuben  D.,  An  Address  on  Ardent  Spirits.  Hanover, 
N.  H.,  1828. 

Nott,  Eliphalet,  Lectures  on  Bible  Temperance.  Albany, 
1847. 

Palfrey,  John  G.,  Discourses  on  Intemperance.  Boston,  1827. 


314  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

Parker,  Joel,  An  Address  before  the  Association  in  Keene. 
Keene,  N.  H.,  1830. 

Parley,  Peter,  pseud.,  Five  Letters  to  My  Neighbor  Smith  touch¬ 
ing  the  Fifteen  Gallon  Jug.  Boston,  1838. 

Peterson,  Edward,  The  Bible  Temperance  Review.  Providence, 
1848. 

Pickering,  David,  The  Effects  of  Intemperance.  Providence, 
1827. 

Plain  Facts  Addressed  to  the  Inhabitants  of  Boston.  Boston, 
1834. 

Porter,  Ebenezer,  The  Fatal  Effects  of  Ardent  Spirits.  Hart¬ 
ford,  1811. 

Potter,  Robert,  Boston  Temperance  Songster.  Boston,  1846. 

Prime,  Nathaniel  S.,  A  Sermon  delivered  at  the  opening  of  the 
Presbytery  of  Long  Island.  Brooklyn,  1812. 

An  Address  to  the  Cambridge  Branch  of  the  Moral  Society 
of  the  County  of  Washington.  Albany,  1815. 

Reply  to  Bishop  Hopkins’  Attack  on  the  Temperance  Society, 
By  An  Episcopalian.  Philadelphia,  1836. 

A  Reply  to  the  Report  of  a  Committee  of  those  opposed  to  the 
License  Law.  Boston,  1838. 

A  Report  of  the  trial  of  the  case  of  John  Taylor  vs.  Edward  C. 
Delavan.  Albany,  1840. 

Rhett,  Albert,  The  Temperance  Reform  Vindicated.  Charleston, 
S.  C.,  1843. 

Sir  Richard  Rum.  At  a  Court  Held  at  Punch-Hall  in  the  Colony 
of  Bacchus.  Boston,  1724. 

Rush,  Benjamin,  Directions  for  preserving  the  health  of  soldiers. 
Military  Surgeon,  March,  1908. 

Inquiry  into  the  Effects  of  Ardent  Spirits  on  the  Human  Body 
and  Mind.  Boston,  1811. 

Sargent,  Lucius  M.,  A  Letter  on  the  State  of  the  Temperance  Re¬ 
form  to  the  Rev.  Caleb  Stetson.  Boston,  1836. 

The  Temperance  Tales.  6  vols.  Boston,  1884. 

Sewall,  Thomas,  Effects  of  Intemperance  on  the  Intellectual ,, 
Moral  and  Physical  Powers.  Albany,  1841. 

Shelton,  William,  An  Address  before  Citizens  of  Buffalo.  Buf¬ 
falo,  1835. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  315 

Sigourney,  Lydia  H.,  The  Intemperate.  Boston,  1833. 

Songs  of  the  Washingtonians.  New  York,  1845. 

Sparhawk,  Ebenezer,  A  Sermon  delivered  at  Templeton,  Mass., 
January,  1776.  MS.  in  possession  of  Dean  H.  E.  Hawkes, 
Columbia  College. 

Speech  of  a  Creek  Indian  Against  Immoderate  Use  of  Spirituous 
Liquors.  London,  1754. 

Spring,  Samuel,  The  Only  Safe  Expedient.  Hartford,  1832. 

Sprague,  Peleg,  The  Argument  of  Peleg  Sprague,  Esq.,  before 
the  committee  of  the  legislature.  Boston,  1839. 

Stewart,  Alvan,  An  Essay  on  the  Evils  of  Intemperance.  Utica, 
N.  Y.,  1833. 

Prize  Address  on  licenses  to  retail  ardent  spirits.  Baltimore, 
1835. 

Stow,  Baron,  Address  before  the  Portsmouth  Temperance  So¬ 
ciety.  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  1830. 

Stuart,  Moses,  Scriptural  View  of  the  Wine  Question.  New 
York,  1848. 

Sweetser,  William,  A  Dissertation  on  Intemperance.  Boston, 
1829. 

Taylor,  Thomas  P.,  The  Bottle — A  Drama  in  two  acts.  New 
York,  1847. 

T emperance  Fables  for  the  American  People.  New  York,  1850. 

Temperance  in  the  City  of  New  York.  New  York,  1844. 

Temperance  Lyrics.  Boston,  1844. 

Temperance  Manual  of  the  American  Temperance  Society.  Bos¬ 
ton,  1836. 

Tieknor,  Caleb,  Prize  Address  to  the  Honorable  Corporation  of 
the  City  of  New  York.  New  York,  1834. 

Ware,  Henry,  The  Criminality  of  Intemperance.  Boston,  1823. 

Tucker,  Mark,  A  Plea  for  Entire  Abstinence.  Boston,  1830. 

Wayland,  Francis,  An  Address  before  the  Temperance  Associ¬ 
ation.  Providence,  1831. 

Washingtonian  Teetotalers’  Minstrel.  New  York,  1845. 

Weems,  Mason  L.,  The  Drunkard’s  Looking  Glass.  Philadel¬ 
phia,  1818. 

Wetmore,  George  B.,  An  Appeal  to  the  Protestant  Christians. 
New  York,  1851. 


316  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

White,  P.  S.,  and  Ely,  Ezra  S.,  Vindication  of  the  Order  of  the 
Sons  of  Temperance.  New  York,  1848. 

White,  P.  S.,  and  Pleasants,  H.  R.,  The  War  of  Four  Thousand 
Years.  Philadelphia,  1846. 

Williams,  Moses,  The  Cracked  Jug,  or  Five  Answers  to  my 
neighbor  Parley’s  five  letters.  Boston,  1838. 

Winslow,  Hubbard,  The  Importance  of  Sustaining  the  Law. 
Boston,  1839. 

Withington,  Leonard,  A  Review  of  the  late  Temperance  Move¬ 
ment  in  Massachusetts.  Boston,  1840. 

6.  NEWSPAPERS  AND  PERIODICALS 
( Dates  indicate  files  consulted ) 

Alabama:  Mobile  Commercial  Register  and  Patriot.  1841- 
1842. 

Connecticut:  Connecticut  Courant.  (Hartford)  1800—1825. 
Connecticut  Evangelical  Magazine.  (Hartford)  1814—1815. 
Connecticut  Journal.  (Hartford)  1822—1829. 

Religious  Intelligencer.  (New  Haven)  1817—1818. 
Delaware:  Delaware  Gazette.  (Wilmington)  1841—1843. 
District  of  Columbia:  National  Intelligencer,  1840-1841. 
Georgia:  Georgia  Journal.  (Milledgeville)  1830—1832. 

The  Georgian.  (Savannah)  1833—1834. 

Illinois:  Alton  Commercial  Gazette,  1839—1840. 

The  Galenian.  (Galena)  1834-1835. 

Illinois  Advocate  and  State  Register.  (Springfield)  1834. 
Indiana:  Indiana  State  Sentinel.  (Indianapolis)  1845. 
Kentucky:  Frankfort  Argus,  1831—1833. 

Maysville  Eagle,  1842. 

Maine:  Kennebec  Journal.  (Augusta)  1849-1851. 

Portland  Transcript,  1840—1851. 

Portland  Tribune,  1842—1846. 

Maryland:  Baltimore  Patriot,  1840-1842. 

Massachusetts:  Boston  Christian  Herald,  1831-1832. 

Boston  Daily  Journal,  1846. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


317 


Boston  Daily  Mail,  1841. 

Boston  Recorder,  1829—1831. 

Essex  Register.  (Salem)  1812—1821. 

Hampshire  Gazette.  (Northampton)  1838. 

Massachusetts  Spy.  (Worcester)  1829-1836. 

Panoplist  and  Missionary  Herald.  (Boston)  1806-1819. 
Springfield  Republican,  1838—1839. 

Mississippi:  The  Ariel.  (Natchez)  1829-1830. 

Columbus  Democrat,  1839—1840. 

Statesman  and  Gazette.  (Natchez)  1829. 

New  York:  Albany  Argus,  1837—1838. 

Christian  Advocate.  (New  York)  1826. 

Commercial  Advertiser.  (New  York)  1841. 

New  York  Evangelist,  1828—1834. 

New  York  Observer,  1830—1836. 

New  York  Herald,  1850-1851. 

The  Sun.  (New  York)  1836—1838. 

New  York  Tribune,  1841—1851. 

North  Carolina:  North  Carolina  Standard.  (Raleigh)  1835- 
1838. 

Star  and  North  Carolina  Gazette.  (Raleigh)  1830-1831. 
Western  Carolinian.  (Salisbury)  1834-1835. 

Ohio:  Anti-Slavery  Bugle.  (Salem)  1845—1846. 

Cincinnati  Daily  Enquirer,  1848—1849. 

Cleveland  Daily  Plain  Dealer,  1848—1850. 

Cleveland  Herald,  1841—1842. 

Ohio  State  Journal  (Columbus)  1841—1843. 

Pennsylvania:  National  Gazette.  (Philadelphia)  1840-1842. 
Rhode  Island:  Manufacturers  and  Farmers  Journal.  (Provi¬ 
dence)  1840—1841. 

Providence  Daily  Journal,  1841—1844. 

South  Carolina:  Charleston  Courier,  1839—1841. 

Southern  Chronicle.  (Columbia)  1841—1843. 

Tennessee:  The  Standard,  (Knoxville)  1845—1847. 

Vermont:  The  State  Banner.  (Bennington)  1841-1843. 
Virginia:  Richmond  Enquirer,  1839—1844. 

Richmond  Whig,  1842—1845. 


318 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


7.  DIARIES,  JOURNALS  AND  OTHER  PERSONALIA 

Ames  Diary,  Dedham  Historical  Register,  II,  Dedham,  Mass., 
1891. 

Asbury,  Francis:  Journal  of  Francis  Asbury.  3  vols.  New 
York,  1901. 

Beecher,  Lyman:  Autobiography,  correspondence,  etc.,  of  Ly¬ 
man  Beecher,  D.D.,  Charles  Beecher,  editor.  New  York, 
1865. 

Belknap,  Jeremy:  Belknap  Papers.  Massachusetts  Historical 
Society,  Collections,  Fifth  Series,  I — II,  Sixth  Series,  IV. 

Bentley,  William:  Dairy  of  William  Bentley,  D.D.  3  vols. 
Salem,  Mass.,  1914. 

Bicker,  Henry:  Orderly  Book  of  the  2nd  Pennsylvania  Con¬ 
tinental  Line.  Pennsylvania  Magazine,  XXXVI. 

Boucher,  Jonathan:  Letters  of  Jonathan  Boucher.  Maryland 
Historical  Magazine,  VII. 

Byrd,  William:  Writings  of  Col.  William  Byrd,  J.  S.  Bassett, 
editor.  New  York,  1901. 

Cartwright,  Peter:  Autobiography  of  Peter  Cartwright,  W.  P. 
Strickland,  editor.  New  York,  1857. 

Chalkley,  Thomas:  The  Journal  of  Thomas  Challcley.  Phila¬ 
delphia,  1866. 

Coke,  Thomas:  Extracts  of  the  Journals  of  the  late  Rev.  Thomas 
Coke.  Dublin,  1816. 

Dow,  Neal:  The  Reminiscences  of  Neal  Dow.  Portland,  Me., 
1898. 

Finley,  James  B.:  Autobiography  of  Rev.  James  B.  Finley, 
W.  P.  Strickland,  editor.  Cincinnati,  1855. 

Fithian,  Philip:  Journal  and  Letters,  1767— 177 If.,  John  R.  Wil¬ 
liams,  editor.  Princeton,  N.  J.,  1900. 

Fisher,  George:  Narrative  of  George  Fisher.  William  and 
Mary  College  Quarterly,  XVII. 

Gough,  John  B.:  Autobiography  and  Personal  Recollections  of 
John  B.  Gough.  Springfield,  Mass.,  1870. 

Platform  Echoes.  London,  1885. 

Sunlight  and  Shadow.  Hartford,  Conn.,  1881. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  319 

Grant;  Anne  Macvicar:  Memoirs  of  an  American  Lady,  James 
G.  Wilson,  editor.  2  vols.  New  York,  1901. 

Gridley,  Luke:  Luke  Gridley’s  Diary  of  1757.  Hartford, 
Conn.,  1907. 

Hempstead,  Joshua:  Diary  of  Joshua  Hempstead.  New  Lon¬ 
don  County  Historical  Society,  Collections,  I. 

Hone,  Philip:  Diary  of  Philip  Hone,  Bayard  Tuckerman,  ed¬ 
itor.  3  vols.  New  York,  1889. 

Hopkins,  Samuel:  Works  of  Samuel  Hopkins.  3  vols.  Bos¬ 
ton,  1854. 

Howells,  W.  C. :  Recollections  of  Life  in  Ohio.  Cincinnati, 
1895. 

Knight,  Sarah  Kemble:  The  Private  Journal  of  Madame 
Knight,  W.  R.  Deane,  editor.  Boston,  1858. 

Marsh,  John:  Temperance  Recollections.  New  York,  1866. 

Mather,  Cotton:  Diary  of  Cotton  Mather.  Mass.  Hist.  Soc., 
Collections,  Seventh  Series,  VII-VIII. 

Mather,  Increase:  Diary  by  Increase  Mather,  S.  A.  Greene, 
editor.  Cambridge,  Mass.,  1900. 

Reynolds,  John:  My  Own  Times.  Chicago,  1879. 

Rush,  Benjamin:  A  Memorial  containing  travels  through  life 
of  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush  written  by  himself,  L.  A.  Biddle, 
editor.  Lanoraie,  1905. 

Sewall,  Samuel:  Diary  of  Samuel  Sewall.  Mass.  Hist.  Soc. 
Collections,  Fifth  Series,  V— VII. 

Seward,  William  H.:  Autobiography  of  William  II .  Seward, 
Frederick  Seward,  editor.  New  York,  1877. 

Sigourney,  Lydia  H.:  Letters  of  Life.  New  York,  1868. 

Thacher,  James:  A  Military  Journal.  Boston,  1823. 

Watson,  Elkanah:  Men  and  Times  of  the  Revolution ;  or  Mem¬ 
oirs  of  Elkanah  Watson,  W.  C.  Watson,  editor.  New  York, 
1856. 

Woolman,  John:  The  Journal  and  Essays  of  John  Woolman, 
Amelia  M.  Gummere,  editor.  New  York,  1922. 

8.  MISCELLANEOUS 

Benezet,  Anthony,  Pennsylvania  Spelling  Book.  Philadelphia, 

1779. 


320  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

Broadsides,  Ballads,  etc.,  in  Massachusetts,  1689—1800,  W.  C. 
Ford,  editor.  Mass.  Hist.  Soc.,  Collections,  LXXV. 

Colton,  Calvin,  Protestant  Jesuitism.  New  York,  1836. 

Coxe,  Tench,  A  View  of  the  United  States  of  America.  Phila¬ 
delphia,  1794. 

Commerce  of  Rhode  Island,  1726—1800.  Mass.  Hist.  Soc.,  Col¬ 
lections,  Seventh  Series,  IX-X. 

Davis,  Alexander  S.,  A  Loud  Call  to  the  Citizens  of  this  Nation. 
Hanover,  Pa.,  1842. 

Delavan,  E.  C.,  editor,  Temperance  Essays.  New  York,  1884. 

Dexter,  Franklin,  Investigation  of  the  Fifteen  Gallon  Law. 
Boston,  1839. 

Doctrines  and  Discipline  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  in 
America.  New  York,  1808. 

Early  Records  of  the  Town  of  Providence.  Providence,  1893. 

Essex  County  Court  Files.  Historical  Collections  of  Essex  In¬ 
stitute,  XLIV. 

First  Annual  Report  of  the  Managers  of  the  Society  for  the 
Prevention  of  Pauperism  in  New  York.  New  York,  1818. 

First  Ten  Annual  Reports  of  the  American  Board  of  Commission¬ 
ers  for  Foreign  Missions.  Boston,  1822. 

Hopkins,  John  H.,  The  Primitive  Church.  Burlington,  1836. 

Huntington  Town  Records,  C.  R.  Street,  editor.  3  vols.  Hunt¬ 
ington,  L.  I.,  1887. 

Journals  of  the  General  Conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church,  1796—1856.  New  York,  1856. 

Minutes  of  the  Methodist  Conference  Annually  Held  in  America. 
New  York,  1813. 

Oyster  Bay  Town  Records.  New  York,  1916. 

Parker,  Thomas  J.,  Teetotalism  Unmasked.  New  York,  1851. 

Pease,  J.  C.  and  Niles,  J.  M.,  A  Gazetteer  of  Connecticut  and 
Rhode  Island.  Hartford,  1819. 

Reasons  for  not  joining  the  Temperance  Society.  By  a  Clergy¬ 
man.  Baltimore,  1836. 

Records  and  Files  of  the  Quarterly  Courts  of  Essex  County, 
Mass.  8  vols.  Salem,  1911—1921. 

'Records  of  the  Court  of  New  Castle,  1676-1681.  Lancaster, 
Pa.,  1904. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


321 

Report  of  the  Committee  on  petitions  in  relation  to  the  license 
laws.  Printed  by  order  of  the  Legislature.  New  Haven, 
1838. 

Report  of  Linus  Child  to  the  Legislature  of  1838.  Boston,  1867. 
Rush,  Benjamin,  Essays — Literary,  Moral  and  Philosophical. 
Philadelphia,  1798. 

Seybert,  Adam,  Statistical  Annals.  Philadelphia,  1818. 
Sigourney,  Lydia  H.,  Boy’s  Reading  Booh  in  Prose  and  Poetry. 
New  York,  1839. 

II.  SECONDARY  MATERIALS 

1.  GENERAL  WORKS  ON  TEMPERANCE 

Armstrong,  Lebbeus,  History  of  the  Temperance  Reformation. 
New  York,  1868. 

Buckingham,  J.  S.,  History  and  Progress  of  the  Temperance  Re¬ 
form  in  Great  Britain.  London,  1854. 

Cherrington,  Ernest  H.,  The  Evolution  of  Prohibition  in  the 
United  States.  Westerville,  O.,  1920. 

Couling,  Samuel,  History  of  the  Temperance  Movement  in  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland.  London,  1862. 

Clark,  George  F.,  History  of  the  Temperance  Reform  in  Massa¬ 
chusetts,  1813—1883.  Boston,  1888. 

Dorchester,  Daniel,  The  Liquor  Problem',  in  All  Ages.  New 
York,  1884. 

Dunlop,  John,  The  Philosophy  of  Drinking  Usage  in  Great  Brit¬ 
ain.  London,  1839. 

Dunn,  J.  B.,  editor.  Centennial  Temperance  Volume.  New 
York,  1877. 

Scomp,  Henry  A.,  King  Alcohol  in  the  Realm  of  King  Cotton. 
Oxford,  Ga.,  1888. 

Wheeler,  Henry,  Methodism  and  the  Temperance  Reformation. 
Cincinnati,  1882. 

Winskill,  P.  T.,  The  Temperance  Movement  and  its  Workers. 
4  vols.  London,  1892. 

Woolley,  John  G.,  and  Johnson,  W.  E.,  Temperance  Progress  in 
the  Century.  Philadelphia,  1903. 


322 


THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 


2.  BIOGRAPHIES  AND  MEMOIRS 

T.  S.  'Arthur,  His  Life  and  Works.  By  One  Who  Knows  Him. 
Philadelphia,  1873. 

Baird,  H.  M.,  Life  of  the  Rev.  Robert  Baird.  New  York,  1866. 
Bartlett,  William  S.,  The  Frontier  Missionary :  A  Memoir  of 
Rev.  Jacob  Bailey.  Boston,  1853. 

Bungay,  George  W.,  Pen  Portraits  of  Illustrious  Abstainers. 
New  York,  1881. 

Coad,  Oral  S.,  William  Dunlap.  New  York,  1917- 
Cutler,  W.  P.  and  J.  P.,  Life  of  Rev.  Manasseh  Cutler.  2  vols. 
Cincinnati,  1888. 

William  Lloyd  Garrison,  The  Story  of  His  Life  told  by  his 
Children.  4  vols.  New  York,  1885-1889. 

Hall,  Arethusa,  Life  and  Character  of  the  Rev.  Sylvester  Judd. 
Boston,  1854. 

Hallowell,  Anna  D.,  James  and  Lucretia  Mott.  Boston,  1884. 
Hallock,  W.  A.,  A  Sketch  of  the  Life  and  Labors  of  Justin 
Edwards.  New  York,  1855. 

Harper,  Ida  H.,  The  Life  and  Work  of  Susan  B.  Anthony.  3 
vols.  Indianapolis,  1899-1908. 

Hawkins,  W.  G.,  Life  of  John  II .  W.  Hawkins.  Boston,  1859. 
The  Life  of  the  late  Right  Reverend  John  Henry  Hopkins.  By 
One  of  his  Sons.  New  York,  1873. 

Howe,  M.  A.  de  Wolfe,  Memoirs  of  the  Life  and  Services  of  the 
Rt.  Rev.  Alonzo  Potter.  Philadelphia,  1871. 

Jeter,  J.  B.,  A  Memoir  of  Abner  Clopton.  Richmond,  1837. 
Maguire,  John  F.,  Father  Mathew.  New  York,  1864. 
Illustrated  Memoir  of  Father  Mathew.  Philadelphia,  1847. 
Martyn,  Carlos,  John  B.  Gough,  The  Apostle  of  Cold  Water. 
New  York,  1893. 

Organ,  T.  W.,  Biographical  Sketch  of  General  Neal  Dow. 
New  York,  1880. 

Parker,  E.  P.,  Appreciation  of  Calvin  Chapin.  Providence, 
1908. 

Pettit,  Thomas  M.,  Memoir  of  Roberts  Faux.  Philadelphia, 
1840. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  323 

Pilcher,  James  E.,  Life  and  Labors  of  Elijah  H.  Pilcher  of 
Michigan.  New  York,  1892. 

Prentice,  George,  Wilbur  Fisk.  Boston  and  New  York,  1890. 
Ramsay,  David,  An  Eulogium  upon  Benjamin  Rush.  Phila¬ 
delphia,  1813. 

Richards,  W.  C.,  A  Memoir  of  George  N.  Briggs.  Boston,  1866. 
Sheppard,  John  H.,  Reminiscences  of  Lucius  Manlius  Sargent. 
Boston,  1871. 

Staughton,  William,  An  Eulogium  in  Memory  of  the  late  Dr. 

Benjamin  Rush.  Philadelphia,  1813. 

Thayer,  W.  M.,  Life  and  Recollections  of  Charles  Jewett.  Bos¬ 
ton,  1880. 

Tracy,  E.  C.,  Memoir  of  Jeremiah  Evarts.  Boston,  1845. 

Van  Santvoord,  Cornelius,  Memoirs  of  Eliphalet  Nott.  New 
York,  1876. 

Vaux,  Roberts,  Memoirs  of  the  Life  of  Anthony  Benezet.  Phila¬ 
delphia,  1817. 

3.  STATE  AND  LOCAL  HISTORIES 

Adams,  Charles  Francis,  Three  Episodes  of  Massachusetts  His¬ 
tory.  Boston  and  New  York,  1893. 

Arnold,  Samuel  G.,  History  of  the  State  of  Rhode  Island  and 
Providence  Plantations.  Providence,  1894. 

Babson,  John  J.,  History  of  the  Town  of  Gloucester,  Mass., 
Gloucester,  1860. 

Bacon,  Nathaniell,  Annalls  of  Ipswiche,  W.  H.  Richardson,  ed¬ 
itor.  Ipswich,  1884. 

Baird,  C.  W.,  History  of  Rye,  N.  Y.  New  York,  1871. 

Baldwin,  Edgar  M.,  The  Making  of  a  Township.  Fairmount. 
Ind.,  1917. 

Barry,  J.  S.,  Historical  Sketch  of  the  Town  of  Hanover,  Mass. 
Boston,  1853. 

Bates,  S.  A.,  Records  of  the  Town  of  Braintree.  Randolph, 
Mass.,  1886. 

Blackman,  Emily  C.,  History  of  Susquehanna  County,  Pa. 
Philadelphia,  1873. 

Bliss,  W.  R.,  Colonial  Times  on  Buzzard’s  Bay.  Boston,  1889. 


324  THE  ORIGINS  OF  PROHIBITION 

Boyd,  John,  Annals  of  Winchester ,  Conn.  Hartford,  1873. 

Bruce,  P.  A.,  Economic  History  of  Virginia  in  the  Seventeenth 
Century.  2  vols.  New  York,  1896. 

Institutional  History  of  Virginia  in  the  Seventeenth  Century. 
New  York,  1910, 

Cabot,  Mary  R.,  Annals  of  Brattlehoro,  Vt.  Brattleboro, 
1921. 

Chalkley,  Lyman,  Chronicles  of  Scotch-Irish  Settlement  in  Vir¬ 
ginia.  2  vols.  Rosslyn,  Va.,  1912. 

Chase,  G.  W.,  History  of  Haverhill,  Mass.  Haverhill,  1861. 

Clark,  S.  J.,  History  of  McDonough  County,  III.  Springfield, 
Ill.,  1878. 

Cochran,  Joseph,  History  of  Mifflin  County,  Pa.  Harrisburg, 
1879. 

Coffin,  Charles  C.,  History  of  Boscawen  and  Webster.  Con¬ 
cord,  N.  H.,  1878. 

Dahlinger,  C.  W.,  Pittsburgh,  A  Sketch  of  Its  Early  Social  Life. 
New  York,  1916. 

Davis,  W.  W.  H.,  Doylestown,  Old  and  New.  Doylestown,  Pa., 
1905. 

Eastman,  J.  R.,  History  of  Andover,  N.  H.  Concord,  N.  H., 
1910. 

Emery,  Edwin,  History  of  Sanford,  Me.  Fall  River,  Mass., 
1901. 

Fairbanks,  E.  T.,  The  Town  of  Saint  J ohnsbury ,  Vt.  St.  Johns- 
bury,  1914. 

Fairchild,  James  H.,  Oberlin,  The  Colony  and  the  College. 
Oberlin,  1883. 

Farmer,  Silas,  History  of  Detroit  and  Wayne  County.  De¬ 
troit,  1890. 

Felt,  Joseph,  Annals  of  Salem.  2  vals.  Salem,  1845-1849. 

History  of  Ipswich,  Essex  and  Hamilton.  Cambridge,  1834. 

Fox,  D.  R.,  The  Decline  of  Aristocracy  in  the  Politics  of  New 
York.  New  York,  1919. 

Hall  Henry,  History  of  Auburn,  N.  Y.  Auburn,  1869. 

Harman,  John  N.  Sr.,  Annals  of  Tazewell  County,  Va.  Rich¬ 
mond,  1922. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  325 

Hazard,  Samuel,  Annals  of  Pennsylvania  from  the  Discovery  of 
the  Delaware.  Philadelphia,  1850. 

Head,  James  W.,  History  of  Loudoun  County,  Va.  Park  View 
Press,  1909. 

Hollister,  H.,  History  of  Lackawanna  Valley.  Philadelphia, 
1885. 

Howe,  Henry,  Historical  Collections  of  Ohio.  Columbus,  1891. 
Pludson,  Alfred,  History  of  Sudbury,  Mass.  Sudbury,  1889. 
Hurlbut,  Henry  H.,  Chicago  Antiquities.  Chicago,  1880. 
Jenkins,  Howard  M.,  Historical  Collections  of  Gwynedd. 
Philadelphia,  1897. 

Judd,  Sylvester,  History  of  Hadley.  Springfield,  Mass.,  1905. 
Kimball,  Gertrude  S.,  Providence  in  Colonial  Times.  Boston, 
1912. 

Kuhns,  Oscar,  German  and  Swiss  Settlements  of  Colonial 
Pennsylvania.  New  York,  1901. 

Lapham,  W.  B.,  History  of  Bethel,  Me.  Augusta,  Me.,  1891. 
Larned,  Ellen  D.,  History  of  Windham  County,  Conn.  2  vols. 
Worcester,  Mass.,  1880. 

Maxwell,  Hu,  History  of  Tucker  County,  W.  Va.  Kingwood, 
W.  Va.,  1884. 

Mead,  Spencer  P.,  Ye  Historic  of  Ye  Towne  of  Greenwich. 
New  York,  1911. 

Merrill,  Georgia  D.,  editor,  History  of  Carroll  County,  N.  H. 
Boston,  1889. 

Morrison,  Leonard  A.,  History  of  Windham,  N.  H.  Boston, 
1883. 

Morton,  Oren  F.,  History  of  Rockbridge  County,  Va.  Staunton, 
1920. 

Munsell,  Joel  R.,  Annals  of  Albany.  10  vols.  Albany,  1850— 
1860. 

Murray,  Louise  W.,  Old  Tioga  Point  and  Early  Athens,  Pa. 
Athens,  Pa.,  1908. 

Neill,  Edward  D.,  Threads  of  Maryland  Colonial  History. 
Philadelphia,  1867. 

Nourse,  H.  S.,  The  Early  Records  of  Lancaster,  Mass.  Lancas¬ 
ter,  1884. 


i 


326  THE  origins  of  prohibition 

Orcutt,  Samuel,  History  of  New  Milford  and  Bridgewater ,  Conn. 
Hartford,  1882. 

History  of  Torrington,  Conn.  Albany,  1878. 

Phelps,  Charles  S.,  Rural  Life  in  Litchfield  County.  Norfolk, 
Conn.,  1917. 

Randall,  E.  O.,  and  Ryan,  D.  J.,  History  of  Ohio.  5  vols. 
New  York,  1912. 

Roberts,  Millard,  History  of  Remsen,  N.  Y.  Remsen,  1914. 
Sanford,  C.  E.,  Early  History  of  Hopkinton.  Boston,  1903. 
Sheperd,  W.  R.,  History  of  Proprietary  Government  in  Pennsyl¬ 
vania.  New  York,  1896. 

Stiles,  H.  R.,  editor,  The  History  of  Ancient  Wethersfield, 
Conn.  2  vols.  New  York,  1904. 

Stone,  W.  L.,  Reminiscences  of  Saratoga.  New  York,  1880. 
Thompson,  Francis,  History  of  Greenfield,  Mass.  Greenfield, 
1904. 

Turner,  J.  K.,  and  Bridges,  J.  L.  History  of  Edgecombe  County, 
N.  C.  Raleigh,  1920. 

Usher,  J.  M.,  History  of  the  Town  of  Medford.  Boston,  1886. 
Waters,  Thomas  F.,  Ipswich  in  the  Massachusetts  Bay  Colony. 
2  vols.  Ipswich,  1917. 

Watson,  J.  F.,  Annals  of  Philadelphia  and  Pennsylvania  in  the 
Olden  Times.  Philadelphia,  1887. 

Wayland,  John  W.,  History  of  Rockingham  County,  V a.  Day- 
ton,  Va.,  1912. 

Weeden,  W.  B.,  Economic  and  Social  History  of  New  England, 
1620—1789.  2  vols.  Boston  and  New  York,  1890. 

Wells,  F.  P.,  History  of  Newbury,  Vt.  St.  Johnsbury,  Vt., 
1902. 

White,  Alain  C.,  History  of  the  Town  of  Litchfield,  Conn. 
Litchfield,  1920. 

Wilson,  Erasmus,  editor,  History  of  Pittsburgh.  Chicago,  1898. 
Wise,  Jennings  C.,  Eastern  Shore  of  Virginia.  Richmond,  1911. 
Woods,  Edgar,  Albemarle  County  in  Virginia.  Charlottesville, 
1901. 

Young,  Andrew  W.,  History  of  Chautauqua  County,  N.  Y. 
Buffalo,  1875. 

History  of  Warsaw,  N.  Y.  Buffalo,  1869. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

4.  MISCELLANEOUS 


327 


Ayer,  Mary  F.,  Early  Days  on  Boston  Common.  Boston,  1910. 
Bliss,  W.  R.,  Side-Glimpses  from  the  Colonial  Meeting  House. 
Boston,  1894. 

Brown,  Alexander,  The  Genesis  of  the  United  States.  Boston, 
1890. 

Clubb,  Henry  S.,  The  Maine  Liquor  Law.  New  York,  1856. 
Documentary  History  of  the  Maine  Law.  New  York, 
1855. 

Earle,  Alice  M.,  Customs  and  Fashions  in  Old  New  England. 
New  York,  1902. 

The  Sabbath  in  Puritan  New  England.  New  York,  1893. 
Field,  Edward,  The  Colonial  Tavern.  Providence,  1897- 
Fisher,  Sydney  G.,  Men,  Women  and  Manners  in  Colonial  Times. 
Philadelphia,  1898. 

Griffiths,  T.  S.,  A  History  of  Baptists  in  New  Jersey.  Hights- 
town,  N.  J.,  1904. 

Hanscom,  Elizabeth  D.,  The  Heart  of  the  Puritan.  New  York, 
1917. 

Hitchcock,  Edward,  Reminiscences  of  Amherst  College.  North¬ 
ampton,  1863. 

Houck,  G.  F.,  The  Church  in  Northern  Ohio  and  in  the  Diocese 
of  Cleveland.  New  York,  1887. 

Kittredge,  George  L.,  The  Old  Farmer  and  His  Almanac. 
Boston,  1904. 

Lord,  John  K.,  History  of  Dartmouth  College,  1815—1909. 
Cambridge,  1913. 

Mathews,  Lois  K.,  The  Expansion  of  New  England.  Boston, 
1909. 

Mesick,  Jane  Louise,  The  English  Traveler  in  America,  1785- 
1885.  New  York,  1922. 

Neill,  E.  D.,  History  of  the  Virginia  Company  of  London. 
Albany,  1869. 

Purcell,  Richard  J.,  Connecticut  in  Transition.  1775-1818. 
Washington,  1918. 

Riley,  Woodridge,  American  Thought  from  Puritanism  to  Prag¬ 
matism.  New  York,  1915. 


328  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Shea,  John  G.,  A  History  of  the  Catholic  Church  within  the 
Limits  of  the  United  States.  New  York,  1892. 

Smith,  Helen  E.,  Colonial  Days  and  Ways.  New  York,  1900. 
Stanard,  Mary  N.,  Colonial  Virginia,  Its  People  and  Customs. 
Philadelphia,  1917. 

Stinness,  J.  H.,  Rhode  Island  Legislation  Against  Strong  Drink. 
Providence,  1919. 

Strobel,  P.  A.,  The  Salzburgers  and  Their  Descendants.  Balti¬ 
more,  1855. 

Sweet,  W.  W.,  Circuit-Rider  Days  in  Indiana.  Indianapolis, 
1916. 

Thomann,  G.,  Colonial  Liquor  Laws.  New  York,  1887. 

Tucker,  George,  Progress  of  the  United  States  in  Population  and 
Wealth.  New  York,  1843. 

Tyler,  L.  G.,  The  Cradle  of  the  Republic.  Richmond,  1900. 
Webb,  Sidney  and  Beatrice,  The  History  of  Liquor  Licensing  in 
England.  London,  1903. 


INDEX 


A 

Abbott,  Abiel,  90,  91 
Abolitionism,  connection  with  tem¬ 
perance  reform,  176;  repudiated 
by  Northern  reformers,  177 ; 
embarrasses  temperance  reform, 
217-219;  attributed  to  Father 
Mathew,  218-220 
Acrelius,  Israel,  35,  36 
Adams,  J.  G.,  241 
Adams,  John,  59 
Agnew,  Samuel,  134 
Alden,  Ebenezer,  263 
Alexander,  Archibald,  59 
American  Bible  Society,  134 
American  Board  of  Commissioners 
for  Foreign  Missions,  108-109 
American  Quarterly  Temperance 
Magazine,  163 

American  Revolution,  24,  50,  59- 
60,  61 

American  Society  for  the  Promo¬ 
tion  of  Temperance  (see  Amer¬ 
ican  Temperance  Society) 
American  Sunday  School  Union, 
241 

American  Temperance  Society, 
formed,  108;  membership,  110; 
principles,  111;  financial  agent, 
112;  religious  propaganda,  116; 
philosophy  of  reform,  124-125; 
pledge,  126;  growth  of  auxiliary 
societies,  127-129;  national  con¬ 
vention,  1833,  132-133;  estab¬ 
lishes  Journal  of  Humanity, 
139;  reports,  225 

American  Temperance  Union, 
formed,  153;  officers,  154-155; 


policies,  155;  change  in  pledge, 
155-158;  and  Washingtonians, 
188,  207 ;  publications,  226 ;  and 
temperance  drama,  255 
American  Tract  Society,  108,  140, 
225  n. 

Ames,  Fisher,  69 
Amherst  College,  146-147 
Amory,  Thomas,  50 
Anderson,  David,  183  n. 

Andover  Seminary,  109 
Anthony,  Susan  B.,  215 
Anti-Saloon  League,  1 
Anti-slavery  movement,  connec¬ 
tion  with  temperance  reform  in 
Maine,  289-290 

Anti-temperance  sentiment,  256; 
in  Pennsylvania,  258,  261;  pros¬ 
ecution  of  Rev.  George  B. 
Cheever,  259-260 
Appleton,  James,  285,  290 
Appleton,  Jesse,  245 
Archer,  Stevenson,  136 
Armstrong,  Lebbeus,  78-79,  115 
Armstrong,  Samuel,  92 
Arthur,  Timothy  S.,  240,  244,  249 
et  seq.,  299 
Asbury,  Francis,  67 
Axley,  James,  104 
Ayrault,  Daniel,  48,  49 

B 

Baird,  Robert,  178 

Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad,  141 

Baltimore  Athenaeum,  250 

Baltimore,  Lord,  10,  59 

Bangs,  Nathan,  117 

Baptists,  in  western  country,  102- 


330  INDEX 


103;  attitude  toward  temperance 
reform,  113,  118,  120;  Primitive, 
119;  influence,  300 
Beecher,  Lyman,  68;  pastor  at 
East  Hampton,  80;  denounces 
ardent  spirits,  81 ;  leader  of  re¬ 
form  in  Connecticut,  84-85,  88, 
89;  letters  to  Asahel  Hooker,  86, 
87;  preaches  Six  Sermons,  105, 
107 ;  advocates  change  in  pledge, 
146,  155;  influence  felt,  269,  296 
Beer,  subject  to  tax  in  colonies, 
20-21;  production  encouraged, 
31-32 

Belknap,  Jeremy,  correspondence 
with  Benjamin  Rush,  74-75,  77 
Bellomont,  Earl  of,  32-33 
Benezet,  Anthony,  64-65,  66 
Berry,  Sidney,  80 
Bigelow,  Timothy,  91 
Birket,  James,  42,  50 
Blair,  John,  137 
Blanchard,  Claude,  62 
Boston  Daily  Mail,  187 
Boston  Recorder,  239 
Boudinot,  Elias,  133 
Boylston,  Richard,  134 
Braddock’s  Defeat,  10 
Bradford,  William,  26 
Briggs,  George  N.,  137,  200 
Briggs,  George  W.,  241 
Brissot  de  Warville,  J.  P.,  62 
Brown,  Charles  Brockden,  246 
Brown,  James,  48,  50 
Brown  v.  Maryland,  267 
Brown  University,  109,  147 
Buckingham,  James  Silk,  179 
Buell,  David,  Jr.,  134 
Burnaby,  Andrew,  35 
Byrd,  William,  41 

C 

Cadets  of  Temperance,  215  n. 
Cahoone,  John,  Jr.,  48 
Calvin,  John,  300 


Calvinism,  ideas  of  frugality,  27; 
and  sobriety,  51 ;  and  Thomas 
Jefferson,  83-84;  in  reform  in 
Massachusetts,  91;  influence, 
300 

Campbell,  Archibald,  183  n, 

Carey,  Matthew,  94 
Carroll,  Bishop,  75 
Cartwright,  Peter,  103 
Cass,  Lewis,  137,  138,  220 
Catholics,  and  Benjamin  Rush’s 
appeal,  75;  influenced  by  reform 
in  Ireland,  180;  societies  formed, 
181;  in  Boston  celebration,  199; 
welcome  Father  Mathew,  219; 
form  Father  Mathew  societies, 
221-222 

Chalkley,  Thomas,  55,  56 
Channing,  Walter,  140,  263 
Chapin,  Calvin,  86,  104,  105 
Chapin,  E.  H.,  241 
Chaplin,  James,  108 
Chapman,  William  B.,  255 
Charles  XIV,  178 
Charleston  Courier,  274 
Chase’s  Tavern,  182,  208 
Chastellux,  Francois-Jean  de,  61 
Cheever,  George  B.,  260,  301 
Cheney,  O.  B.,  290 
Children,  in  temperance  societies, 
150-151;  their  pledge,  151;  in 
Cold  Water  Army,  186;  publica¬ 
tions  for,  241-242 
Chipman,  Samuel,  234,  235 
Cholera,  and  intemperance,  232— 
233 

Christian  Advocate,  117 
Christian  Spectator,  139 
Cider,  popular  in  colonies,  33; 

production,  34 
Clark,  Billy  J„  77,  78 
Clay,  Henry,  222 
Clopton,  Abner,  120,  131 
Cocke,  John  H.,  153,  154 
Coke,  Thomas,  67 
Cold  Water  Army,  organized. 


INDEX  331 


182  n.;  in  Boston  celebration, 
200 

Colleges,  interested  in  temperance, 
145-148 

College  of  Physicians,  memorial  to 
Congress,  70;  professorship  of 
Benjamin  Rush,  77;  enlarged 
curriculum,  140 
Colher,  William,  139 
Collins,  Isaac,  155 
Colton,  Calvin,  121-12S,  256 
Columbian  College,  229 
“Communion  question,”  167 
Cone,  C.  C.,  290 

Congregationalists,  attitude  to¬ 
ward  temperance  reform,  113; 
influence,  300 

Congressional  Temperance  Society, 
organized,  136-137 ;  and  George 
N.  Briggs,  200;  reorganized, 
205  n. 

Connecticut  Observer,  104 
Connecticut  Society  for  Refor¬ 
mation  of  Morals,  preliminary 
organization,  85-86;  and  Feder¬ 
alists,  87-88;  denounced  by 
Republicans,  89;  and  Heman 
Humphrey,  146 

Consociation,  in  Connecticut,  84, 
85  n. 

Cook,  Eleutheros,  137 
Cooke,  George  Frederick,  243 
Cope,  Thomas  P.,  135 
Cox,  Samuel  H.,  217 
Cranch,  William,  234  n.,  301 
Crime,  caused  by  intemperance, 
234-235 

Crispin,  William,  61 
Cruikshank,  George,  255 
Curwin,  George,  49 
Cutler,  Manasseh,  77 

D 

Dana,  John  W.,  291,  295 
Dane,  Nathan,  91 


Danforth,  Samuel,  54 
Dankaerts,  Jasper,  33,  46 
Dartmouth  College,  145-146 
Daughters  of  Temperance,  215 
Davis,  Alexander  S.,  261 
Davis,  Jefferson,  220 
Day,  Jeremiah,  147 
Day,  Thomas,  88 

Delavan,  Edward  C.,  132  n. ;  and 
New  York  State  Temperance 
Society,  135,  154;  gifts,  159, 
224;  resignation  as  chairman  of 
executive  committee,  160;  on 
wine  question,  163,  164;  in  Great 
Britain,  179;  in  campaign  for 
new  licence  law,  279,  280 
Delaware  Gazette,  251 
Democrats,  in  the  campaign  of 
1840,  175;  and  “fifteen  gallon 
law,”  265,  269;  in  New  York, 
283;  in  Maine,  290,  291,  293,  294 
Derbys,  of  Salem,  50 
Dexter,  Franklin,  266 
Dexter,  Samuel,  91,  245 
Dickens,  Charles,  230 
Dictionaire  de  Medecine,  231 
Distilleries,  in  New  England,  48; 
number  and  location  in  1810,  99, 
100;  decline  in  number,  143-144; 
consumption  of  grain,  239 
Douglass,  Frederick,  217-218 
Dow,  Neal,  early  life,  283-284; 
and  Maine  Temperance  Union, 
284-285;  attacks  liquor  licences, 
285;  and  Washingtonians,  286; 
appeals  to  legislature,  287;  cam¬ 
paigns  for  prohibitory  law,  288; 
and  anti-slavery  forces,  289 ; 
campaign  for  mayor  of  Port¬ 
land,  292;  and  Maine  Law,  283, 
294,  296,  297 
Doylston  Democrat,  258 
Drama,  temperance,  254-256 
Drunkenness,  in  colonial  Massa¬ 
chusetts,  3-4;  enforcement  of 
lawg  against,  27-31;  increase 


332  INDEX 


during  French  and  Indian  War, 
59;  in  western  country,  104 
Dunlap,  Robert  P.,  136 
Dunlap,  William,  243  et  seq. 
Dunton,  John,  42 
Dutch  Reformed  Church,  action  of 
New  York  Synod,  112;  attitude 
toward  temperance  reform,  118, 
119 

Duties,  levied  on  imported  liquors, 
18;  revenue  from,  19;  colonial 
disputes  over,  20;  difficulty  of 
collection,  22;  imposed  by  Con¬ 
gress,  69-70 
Dwight,  Henry,  135 
Dwight,  Theodore,  86 
Dwight,  Timothy,  69,  86,  104 

E 

Edwards,  Jonathan,  63-64 
Edwards,  Justin,  activity  in  Amer¬ 
ican  Temperance  Society,  108, 
109,  110,  111,  112;  in  United 
States  Temperance  Union,  132  n., 
148,  149;  favors  change  in 

pledge,  155,  182;  essay  on  Well 
Conducted  Farm,  226,  237 
Eighteenth  Amendment,  297 
Eliot,  Samuel  A.,  266 
Ely,  Ezra  S.,  213 
Employers,  interest  in  temperance 
and  labour  efficiency,  235-236, 
302 

Endicott,  John,  4 
English,  Philip,  49 
Enquirer,  The,  167 
Episcopalians,  temperance  activ¬ 
ity,  75;  attitude  toward  reform, 
113,  166 

Essex  Washingtonian,  203 
Evarts,  Jeremiah,  89,  90,  91,  233 
Everett,  Edward,  263,  266,  271 
Excise  laws,  in  colonial  period,  18- 
19;  difficulty  of  collection,  22;  in 
colonial  New  York,  23-24;  in 
New  York  state,  277  et  seq. 


F 

Faneuil  Hall,  187,  219 
Faneuil,  Peter,  50 
Farmers,  use  spirit  rations,  79-80; 
support  temperance  reform,  142; 
and  temperance  propaganda, 
237-238 

Fay,  Warren,  108 
Federalist  Party,  85,  86,  87 
Fessenden,  Samuel,  290 
Fiction,  temperance,  243-252 
“Fifteen  Gallon  Law,”  262-273 
Fillmore,  Millard,  292 
Finley,  James  B.,  103 
Fisk,  Wilbur,  117 
Flournoy,  Josiah,  174,  273 
Foote,  Henry  S.,  273 
Forrester,  Fanny,  240 
Fourth  of  July,  temperance  cele¬ 
brations,  143;  Washingtonian 
celebrations,  198;  in  Maine,  284 
Franklin,  Benjamin,  12,  56 
Frederick  William  III,  178 
Free  Soil  Party,  289,  290,  294 
Frelinghuysen,  Theodore,  135,  136, 
137,  177  n. 

French  and  Indian  War,  24,  59 
French  Revolution,  83,  102 
Friends,  Society  of,  early  condem¬ 
nation  of  intemperance,  55;  ac¬ 
tion  of  Yearly  Meeting  in  1787, 
66;  and  John  Woolman,  64;  and 
Anthony  Benezet,  66 

G 

Garrison,  William  Lloyd,  139  n., 
176,  217,  218,  219 
Gates,  Horatio,  61 
Georgia  State  Temperance  Society, 
219 

Gibbons  v.  Ogden,  267 
Gift  books,  240-241 
Gilbert,  Sylvester,  86 
Goddard,  Calvin,  86 


INDEX  333 


Oodey’s  Lady’s  Book,  240,  249, 
250 

Gordon,  Adam,  35 
Gough,  John  B.,  early  life,  192- 
193;  signs  pledge,  194;  as  lec¬ 
turer,  194-195;  relapse,  195-196; 
powerful  speaker,  196;  in  Bos¬ 
ton,  200;  earnings,  225 
Grant,  Moses,  263 
Gray,  Harrison,  134 
Great  Britain,  influence  of  Amer¬ 
ican  temperance  reform,  178-179 
Greeley,  Horace,  227  n.,  240,  278, 
280 

Grog-shops,  decline  in  number, 
143;  evade  licence  laws,  168;  in 
Massachusetts,  269;  barred  in 
Wisconsin  and  Michigan,  277 
Grundy,  Felix,  136,  138  n. 

H 

Hale,  Enoch,  108 
Hale,  John  P.,  220 
Hall,  Willard,  136 
Hallett,  Benjamin  F.,  266 
Hallock,  William  H.,  108,  140 
Hamilton,  Dr.  Alexander,  42 
Hampshire  Gazette,  268 
Harriman,  John,  44 
Harrison,  William  Henry,  175,  187 
Hartford  Convention,  88,  91 
Harvard,  College,  44,  45,  245 
Hawkins,  John  H.  W.,  184;  speaks 
for  Washingtonians,  187,  188; 
early  life,  190;  signs  pledge, 
191;  temperance  tours,  191-192 
Hawthorne,  Nathaniel,  240 
Hempstead,  Joshua,  41 
Henry,  Patrick,  65 
Hertell,  Thomas,  97,  98 
Hewitt,  Nathaniel,  112 
Higginson,  John,  51,  52 
Hinde,  Thomas,  95 
Hitchcock,  Edward,  146,  228 
Hoar,  Samuel,  272 


Hobart,  Peter,  44 
Holmes,  Ezekiel,  290 
Holmes,  Oliver  Wendell,  241 
Hooker,  Asahel,  86,  87 
Hopkins,  John  H.,  120-121,  166, 
256 

Hopkins,  Stephen,  50 
!Hoss,  John  S.,  183  n. 

Hubbard,  John,  295 
Hubbard,  Samuel,  108,  110 
Humphrey,  Heman,  86,  146 
Hunt,  Thomas  P.,  186  n. 

Hunter,  Robert,  20 
Huntington,  Ebenezer,  88 
Huntington,  Henry,  135 

I 

Independent  Order  of  Rechabites, 
211  n. 

Indians,  drunkenness,  4;  sale  of 
liquor  to,  5;  and  trade  in  intox¬ 
icants,  46-47 

Intemperance,  cost  to  the  nation, 
234,  302 

Ireland,  work  of  Father  Mathew, 
179-190 

Irish,  influenced  by  reports  of  re¬ 
form  in  Ireland,  180;  in  New 
York  state,  281 

J 

James  I,  15 
Janson,  Charles,  99 
Jay,  William,  133,  134,  177  n. 
Jefferson,  Thomas,  61,  83,  84,  183 
Jenks,  William,  108 
Jewett,  Charles,  225;  and  juvenile 
fiction,  241-242 
Johnson,  Ben,  135 
Jones,  Hugh,  33 
Josselyn,  John,  33 
Journal  of  American  Temperance 
Union,  established,  159;  on  use 
of  wine,  159;  wide  circulation, 


334  INDEX 


178;  on  Washingtonians,  200, 
204,  205,  207 ;  on  Sons  of  Tem¬ 
perance,  211,  212;  on  women  in 
temperance  reform,  216;  monthly 
circulation,  226;  on  “spontaneous 
combustion”  theory,  231 ;  on  tem¬ 
perance  drama,  255;  on  “fifteen 
gallon  law,”  271 

Journal  of  Humanity,  established, 
139;  on  use  of  wine,  157;  on  li¬ 
cence  system,  169,  170 

K 

Kalm,  Peter,  35 
Keener,  Christian,  155 
Kelly,  Abby,  216 
Kennebec  Journal,  289 
Kentucky  State  Temperance  Soci¬ 
ety,  144 

Kenyon  College,  147 
Kieft,  William,  13 
King  Philip’s  War,  46 
Kirk,  E.  N.,  217 
Kittredge,  Jonathan,  230 

L 

Labour,  temperance  and  efficiency 
of,  79,  140-141,  235-236,  284,  302 
Ladies’  Benevolent  Societies,  214 
Lathrop,  D.  W.,  132  n. 

Laurens,  Henry,  65 
Lawrence,  Amos,  92 
Leavitt,  Joshua  W.,  154 
Leavitt,  Samuel  R.,  290 
Legislative  temperance  societies,  in 
Ohio,  138;  in  Kentucky,  138 
Liberator,  176,  218 
Liberty  Party,  289,  290 
Licence,  used  in  England,  7 ;  co¬ 
lonial  usage  in  liquor  traffic,  8-9; 
authority  to  grant,  9;  price  of, 
9-10;  revenue  from,  10;  granted 
by  justices,  11-12;  system  of  is¬ 
suing  in  early  19th  century,  168- 
169 


Licence  system,  attack  on,  169, 
171-172;  memorials  against,  173; 
and  Flournoy  movement  in  Geor¬ 
gia,  174,  273;  petitions  against, 
262;  revision,  in  Massachusetts, 
263-273;  in  Tennessee;  273  n.;  in 
South  Carolina,  274;  in  Illinois, 
275;  in  Connecticut,  275;  in 
Rhode  Island,  276;  in  Pennsyl¬ 
vania,  277;  in‘  New  York,  277- 
284;  in  Maine,  285  et  seq. 
Lincoln,  Levi,  138 
Lindsay,  David,  49 
Litchfield  County,  temperance  as¬ 
sociation  formed  in  1789,  68; 
and  Beecher’s  sermons,  105 
Lloyd,  Isaac  S.,  155 
Local  option,  275;  in  Illinois,  276; 
in  Pennsylvania,  276-277 ;  in 
Wisconsin,  277;  in  Iowa,  277;  in 
Connecticut,  277 

“Loco-focos,”  in  New  York,  278  n., 
280,  283  n. 

Logan,  William,  43 
Long,  Joshua,  44 
Lopez,  Aaron,  49 
Lucas,  Robert,  136 
Lumpkin,  Joseph  H.,  219 
Lutherans,  attitude  toward  tem¬ 
perance  reform,  113,  influence, 
300 

Me 

McCurley,  James,  83  n. 

M 

Madison,  James,  69,  84 
Maine  Law,  293-295 
Maine  State  Temperance  Society, 
284 

Maine  Temperance  Union,  160,  284 
Mann,  Horace,  145 
Marsh,  John,  134  n.,  159  n.;  crit¬ 
icizes  Washingtonianism,  204;  at- 


INDEX  835 


tacks  Sons  of  Temperance,  211, 
212;  in  American  Temperance 
Union,  226;  and  temperance  fic¬ 
tion,  242,  243;  leader  in  New 
York,  279,  280 
Marshall,  Thomas  F.,  205 
Martha  Washington  societies,  214 
Martin,  William,  180 
Massachusetts  Anti-slavery  Soci¬ 
ety,  218 

Massachusetts  Bible  Society,  109 
Massachusetts  Society  for  the 
Suppression  of  Intemperance 
(see  Massachusetts  Temperance 
Society) 

Massachusetts  Spy,  268 
Massachusetts  Temperance  Soci¬ 
ety,  organized,  90;  leadership, 
91-92;  propaganda,  93-94,  147; 
and  “fifteen  gallon  law,”  268 
Massachusetts  Temperance  Union, 
224,  241 

Mather,  Cotton,  46-53,  54 
Mather,  Increase,  39,  52,  53 
Mathew,  Father  Theobald,  179- 
180;  arrives  in  New  York  City, 
218;  trouble  over  abolition 
views,  218-219;  reception  in 
Washington,  219-220;  tour  of 
the  South,  221 ;  in  Ohio,  222 ; 
influence,  222 
Maxwell,  Hugh,  132  n. 

Mayo,  John,  39 

Mechanics,  form  temperance  soci¬ 
eties,  141 ;  influenced  by  temper¬ 
ance  propaganda,  236,  237;  in 
Maine,  284 

Mechanics  and  Workingmen’s  Tem¬ 
perance  Society,  141 
Melish,  John,  98 
Merritt,  Timothy,  108 
Methodists,  the  rule  of  1753,  66; 
action  of  General  Conference  in 
1780,  66;  action  in  1796,  67  n.; 
and  temperance  activities  in 
Pennsylvania,  75;  in  western 


country,  102,  103;  action  of  Gen¬ 
eral  Conference  in  1816,  104; 
General  Conference  in  1828,  112; 
and  Wilbur  Fisk,  117;  attitude 
toward  temperance  reform,  118, 
120;  influence,  300 
Michaud,  F.  A.,  98 
Mitchell,  William  K.,  183,  184,  200, 
205 

Moody,  John,  52 
Monek,  George,  42 
Moreau  and  Northumberland, 
Temperance  Society  of,  78-81 
Morgan,  James,  52 
Morse,  Jedidiah,  90,  91 
Morton,  Marcus,  108,  110,  270,  271 
Mott,  Lucretia,  216 
Mussey,  Reuben,  90,  140,  146,  150  n. 

N 

National  Philanthropist,  139,  176 
Naudain,  Arnold,  136,  137 
Negroes,  sale  of  intoxicants  to 
forbidden,  17;  in  temperance 
societies,  190;  neglected  by  tem¬ 
perance  reformers,  217 
New  England,  temperance  strength 
in,  129 

New  England  Courant,  54 
New  Hampshire  Courier,  145 
Newkirk,  Matthew,  135 
New  Year’s  Day,  change  in  cus¬ 
toms,  143 

New  York  Commercial  Advertiser, 
233 

New  York  Evening  Post,  142 
New  York  Herald,  222 
New  York  Journal  of  Commerce, 
239 

New  York  Observer,  121,  122,  139 
New  York  Society  for  the  Promo¬ 
tion  of  Internal  Improvements, 
97 

New  York  State  Temperance  So¬ 
ciety,  officers,  135;  auxiliaries. 


336  INDEX 


129-130;  and  employers  of  la¬ 
bour,  140;  publications,  225; 
report  for  1834,  234;  and  legisla¬ 
tion,  278 

New  York  Tribune,  279,  280 
Norton,  John  T.,  155 
Nott,  Eliphalet,  147,  164, 

165;  Scriptural  temperance, 
166;  “spontaneous  combustion’’ 
theory,  231-232 
Noyes,  Joseph  C.,  293 

O 

Oberlin  College,  148 
O’Connell,  Daniel,  218 
Odiorne,  George,  108 
Oglethorpe,  General,  57,  58 
Old  South  Church,  91 
Old  Testament,  165 
Oliver,  Isaac  J.,  208  n. 

Oliver,  John  W.,  208  n.,  215 
O’Neall,  John  B.,  219,  274 
Ordinaries,  defined,  4  n. ;  en¬ 
couraged  in  Maryland,  6;  in 
Massachusetts,  7 ;  in  Rhode 
Island,  7 

Organ,  The,  210,  212,  240 
Otis,  Harrison  Gray,  266 

P 

Panoplist,  89,  234 
Pauperism,  following  the  War  of 
1812,  96-98;  caused  by  intem¬ 
perance,  234-235 

Pauperism,  Society  for  the  Pre¬ 
vention  of,  97 
Payne,  Isaac  B.,  79 
Pennsylvania  Temperance  Re¬ 
corder,  on  licence  system,  171- 
172;  on  distilleries,  239 
Periodicals,  devoted  to  temper¬ 
ance,  226  n.;  for  children,  241- 
242 


Philadelphia  Enquirer,  240 
Physicians,  support  temperance 
reform,  140;  testimony  in  regard 
to  intemperance,  227-230 
Pickering,  Timothy,  91 
Pickering,  William,  49 
Pierpont,  John,  252,  253,  263,  273  n. 
Pitkin,  Timothy,  132  n. 

Pledge,  of  first  temperance  so¬ 
ciety,  78;  of  American  Temper¬ 
ance  Society,  111;  changed  by 
American  Temperance  Union, 
155-158 

Poetry,  temperance,  240-242 
Politics,  avoided  by  temperance 
reformers,  174-175;  and  cam¬ 
paign  of  1840,  175-176;  in  Mass¬ 
achusetts,  262-273;  in  New 
York,  277-284 
Pollard,  J.  F.,  188  n.,  189 
Pond,  S.  M„  290 
Porter,  Eliphalet,  90,  91 
Potter,  Alonzo,  155 
Poughkeepsie  Safeguard,  279 
Presbyterians,  comment  on  their 
temperance  activity,  75;  action 
of  General  Assembly  in  1811, 
90;  in  western  country,  102-103; 
action  of  General  Assembly  in 
1827,  112;  attitude  toward  tem¬ 
perance  reform,  118;  influence, 
300 

Prescott,  William,  91 
Prices,  of  liquors  regulated,  15-16 
Prime,  Nathaniel  S.,  81 
Propaganda,  in  temperance  pub¬ 
lications,  223;  bulk  of  temper¬ 
ance  literature,  224;  stresses 
physiological  effect  of  intemper¬ 
ance,  227-229;  and  “spontaneous 
combustion”  theory,  230-232; 
and  cholera  epidemic,  232-233; 
emphasizes  economic  arguments, 
233-239;  in  poetry  and  fiction, 
240-252 


INDEX  33T 


Q 

Quincy,  Josiah,  Jr.,  35 
R 

Ramsay,  David,  75,  76,  77 
Randall,  D.  B„  290 
Rantoul,  Robert,  92 
Rantoul,  Robert,  Jr.,  270 
Redman,  John,  71 
Reed,  William,  108 
Reese,  Levi  H.,  155 
Reeve,  Tapping,  68,  87,  88,  89 
Religion,  revival  after  1815,  102- 
103;  relation  to  temperance 
reform,  114-116;  and  Washing- 
tonianism,  203-204 ;  and  temper¬ 
ance  propaganda,  300-301 
Republican  Party,  84,  85 
Revival  of  1801,  102 
Rhett,  Albert,  274 
Rhett,  Robert  Barnwell,  274 
Rolland,  Romain,  101 
Ropes,  William,  108 
Rum,  importance  in  colonies,  36- 
39;  in  trade  with  Indians,  46-47 ; 
in  slave-trade,  48-50;  prohibited 
in  Georgia,  57 ;  demand  for  dur¬ 
ing  Revolutionary  War,  60,  61 
Rush,  Benjamin,  early  life,  70-71; 
physician-general  in  Continental 
forces,  72;  ideas  on  mental 
healing,  73;  correspondence  with 
Jeremy  Belknap,  74;  corre¬ 
spondence  with  David  Ramsay, 
75;  professor  in  College  of 
Physicians,  77;  temperance  theo¬ 
ries,  80;  influence,  81;  essay  on 
ardent  spirits,  85,  140,  162,  213, 
226,  227 ;  estimate  of  mortality, 
239,  296 

S 

Sabbath-breaking,  84,  85,  87,  134 


St.  Mary’s  Total  Abstinence  So¬ 
ciety,  199 

Salem  Gazette,  285 

Salem  Landmark,  259 

Sampson,  Ashley,  135 

Sands,  Daniel  H.,  108  n.,  215 

Sargent,  Daniel,  245 

Sargent,  Lucius  M.,  163,  244,  299 

Sartain,  John,  240  n. 

Scottish  Temperance  League,  248 
Secret  societies,  in  temperance  re¬ 
form,  211-212 
Severance,  Luther,  289 
Sewall,  Samuel,  30-31,  34,  54 
Sewall,  Thomas,  140,  228 
Seward,  William  H.,  220 
Shakespeare,  William,  34 
Sharpe,  Horatio,  11,  59 
Sheldon,  Daniel,  68 
Sherman,  Roger  Minot,  87,  88 
Sherwood,  Adiel,  131 
Shirley,  George  H.,  289 
Sigourney,  Lydia  Huntley,  244, 
247-248,  250,  299 
Sloanaker,  William,  240 
Small,  Jesse  W.,  190 
Smith,  Gerrit,  115,  132,  177  n. 
Smith,  John  Cotton,  88 
Smith,  William,  7 
Smith,  W.  H.,  254 
Songs,  Temperance,  252,  253 
Sons  of  Temperance,  organized, 
208;  object,  209;  discipline,  209- 
210;  and  legislation,  210;  growth, 
210-211;  attacked  as  secret  so¬ 
ciety,  211-212;  defended,  213; 
substitute  for  grog-shop,  214; 
and  Daughters  of  Temperance, 
215;  and  Cadets  of  Temperance, 
215  n. 

South  Carolina  Temperance  Advo¬ 
cate,  219 

South  Carolinian,  274 
Southern  Churchman,  113 
Sparhawk,  Ebenezer,  67 


338 

“Spontaneous  Combustion,” 

232 

Sprague,  Peleg,  266,  267 
Springfield  Republican,  268 
Stackpole,  Charles  A.,  290 
Stanton,  Elizabeth  Cady,  216 
Steers,  George,  183  n. 

Stephens,  William,  57,  58 
Stewart,  Moses,  165  n. 

Stone,  John,  260 
Stone,  Lucy,  216 
Storey,  Joseph,  90 
Stratton,  Joel,  194 
Strong,  Caleb,  91 
Stuyvesant,  Peter,  13 
Sunday  Schools,  aid  in  temperance 
reform,  151;  supply  temperance 
literature,  241 

T 

Tait,  David,  47 
Tallmadge,  Benjamin,  68 
Tappan,  Arthur,  177  n. 

Tappan,  John,  92,  108,  110,  132  n., 
146,  147,  154 
Tappan,  Lewis,  177  n. 

Tariff,  and  duties  on  distilled 
spirits,  69-70;  and  importations 
of  wines,  157  n. 

Tavern-keepers,  social  position  in 
colonial  period,  44-45;  in  west¬ 
ern  country,  144;  conventions  in 
Massachusetts,  268 
Taverns,  restrictions  on,  12-13; 
function  of,  14;  characteristics 
of  in  18th  century,  38-43; 
“Kings  Arms,”  39;  “Raleigh,” 
40;  “Blue  Anchor,”  42;  not  sell¬ 
ing  intoxicants,  144;  supplanted 
by  tippling-houses,  168 
Taylor,  Bayard,  240 
Taylor,  Thomas  P.,  255 
Taylor,  Zachary,  220 
“Teetotaler,”  origin,  158  n. 
Teetotaler’s  Hall,  208 


Temperance  Almanac,  1843,  240 
“Temperance  House,”  144,  145 
Temperance  Recorder,  119;  on  the 
use  of  wine,  158;  on  adultera¬ 
tion  of  wine,  163;  on  legislation 
against  liquor  traffic,  172;  rec¬ 
ommended  in  South  Carolina, 
176;  accused  of  abolitionism, 
177;  on  cholera  epidemic,  233 
Theatres,  Park;  255;  National, 
255;  Boston  Museum,  254 
Thomas,  George,  47 
Thurston,  David,  219 
Ticknor,  Elisha,  92 
Trimble,  Allen,  136,  160 
Treadwell,  John,  86,  88 
Tyler,  John,  175 

U 

Unitarianism,  91,  92  n. 

United  States  Temperance  Union, 
formed,  133;  officers,  134-135; 
calls  national  convention,  153; 
reorganized,  153 

V 

VanBuren,  Martin,  174 
Van  Rensselaer,  Stephen,  133,  153 
Vaux,  Roberts,  132  n.,  135 
Vickers,  Jesse,  190  n. 

Virginia,  University  of,  190 
Vroom,  Peter  D.,  i32n. 

Vyall,  John,  39 

W 

Wadsworth,  Benjamin,  54 
Wadsworth,  Benjamin,  in  Mass¬ 
achusetts  Temperance  Society, 
90 

Walton,  John  T.,  289 
Walworth,  Reuben,  123,  132,  134 
War  of  1812,  95,  96,  298 
Ward,  Artemas,  92 


INDEX 

230, 


INDEX 


339 


Washbume,  Emory,  272 
Washington,  George,  60,  61 
Washington’s  Birthday,  celebrated 
by  Washingtonians,  198 
Washingtonians,  origin,  182-183; 
pledge,  183;  charter  members, 
183  n. ;  in  Baltimore,  184;  in 
New  York  City,  184-185;  in  Bos¬ 
ton,  186-188;  as  temperance 
evangelists,  188-190;  success  of 
movement,  197-198;  methods, 
198-199;  celebration  in  Boston 
in  1844,  199-200;  and  older  so¬ 
cieties,  200-202;  and  religion, 
203-204;  and  temperance  legisla¬ 
tion,  205-207 ;  fundamental  weak¬ 
nesses,  207;  and  Sons  of 
Temperance,  208-210;  in  Maine, 
286 

Watts,  John,  135 
Wayland,  Francis,  108,  109,  147 
Webster,  Daniel,  137,  141 
Weems,  Mason  L.,  93 
Wesley,  John,  66 
Western  Reserve,  104 
Whigs,  methods  in  campaign  of 
1840,  175-176;  and  “fifteen  gal¬ 
lon  law,”  265,  268,  269;  in  New 
York,  279,  280,  283;  in  Maine, 
289,  290,  294;  and  Neal  Dow, 
292,  293 

Whiskey,  in  western  country,  60; 

demand  for,  61 
Whiskey  Rebellion,  62 
White,  Philip  S.,  213 
Whiting,  Samuel,  44 
Whittier,  John  G.,  240 
Wilder,  S.  V.  S„  109,  110 
Willey,  Austin,  289 
Williams,  Roger,  5 


Willis,  Nathaniel  P.,  241 
Wilson,  Robert  G.,  95 
Wine  question,  and  total  absti¬ 
nence,  155-159;  dissension  in 
societies,  160;  causes  loss  of 
members,  161;  pamphlet  war¬ 
fare,  162-166 

Wines,  production  in  colonial  pe¬ 
riod,  32-33;  varieties  imported, 
34-35;  domestic,  35 
Winslow,  Hubbard,  269 
Winthrop,  John,  26,  30 
Wisner,  Benjamin,  108,  109 
Wolcott,  Frederick,  68 
Wolcott,  Henry,  34 
Wolcott,  Oliver,  Sr.,  68 
Women,  role  in  reform  movement, 
148-149;  boycott  grocers,  149; 
charitable  work,  150;  in  Tem¬ 
perance  Beneficial  Association, 
150;  increased  activity,  214—216 
Woods,  Leonard,  108,  109,  110,  131 
Woodward,  Thomas,  32 
Woolman,  John,  64 
Worcester,  Samuel,  90 
World’s  Anti-slavery  Convention, 
216 

World’s  Temperance  Convention, 
217 

Wright,  Silas,  278 

Wright,  William  E.,  186,  188,  18§ 

Wyatt,  Sir  Francis,  3 


Y 

Yale  College,  19,  69,  86,  121 
Yale,  Cyrus,  134 

Youth’s  Temperance  Advocate, 
226,  243 


A  NOTE  ON  THE  TYPE  IN 
WHICH  THIS  BOOK  IS  SET 


This  hook  is  composed  ( on  the  Linotype) ,  in  Scotch. 
There  is  a  divergence  of  opinion  regarding  the  exact 
origin  of  this  face,  some  authorities  holding  that  it 
was  first  cut  by  Alexander  Wilson  Sp  Son,  of  Glasgow, 
in  1837 ;  others  trace  it  back  to  a  modernized  Caslon 
old  style  brought  out  by  Mrs.  Henry  Caslon  in  1796  to 
meet  the  demand  for  modern  faces  brought  about  by 
the  popularity  of  the  Bodoni  types.  Whatever  its 
origin,  it  is  certain  that  the  face  was  widely  used  in 
Scotland,  where  it  was  called  Modern  Roman,  and 
since  its  introduction  into  America  it  has  been  known 
as  Scotch.  The  essential  characteristics  of  the 
Scotch  face  are  its  sturdy  capitals,  its  full  rounded 
lower  case,  the  graceful  fillet  of  its  serifs  and  the 
general  effect  of  crispness. 


SET  UP,  ELECTROTYPED,  PRINTED  AND 
BOUND  BY  THE  VAIL-BAILOU  PRESS, 
INC.,  BINGHAMTON,  N.  Y.  •  PA¬ 
PER  MANUFACTURED  BY  W.  C. 
HAMILTON  &  SONS,  MIQUON, 

PA.,  AND  FURNISHED  BY  W . 

F.  ETHERINGTON  &  CO., 

NEW  YORK. 


PHILLIPS  ACADEMY 


867 


00099  203 


DATE  DUE 


36373  178 

K92 


Krout 

Origins  of  prohibition 

DATE  DUE 


r 

OLIVER  WENDELL  HOLMES  LIBRARY 
PHILLIPS  ACADEMY 

ANDOVER,  MASS. 


— | —  I — ?■"£  — — - 

4  ■ 


* 


